VK Jhanji, J - In this petition, challenge is to order dated 23.5.1989, Annexure P-1, whereby the petitioner has been dismissed from service with immediate effect by the President of India in pursuance of provisions of sub-clause (c) of second proviso to Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India.
Petitioner has prayed that his dismissal from service be declared illegal and respondents be directed to reinstate him in service with all consequential benefits.
2.
Petitioner joined Police Department as Assistant Sub-Inspector in 1963 and thereafter promoted as Sub-Inspector in 1971, as Inspector in 1979 and then a Deputy Superintendent of Police.
Vide order dated 23.5.1989, petitioner was dismissed from service as the President of India in pursuance of the provisions of sub-clause (c) of second proviso to Article 311(2) of the Constitution felt satisfied that in the interest of security of the State, it is not expedient to hold an enquiry against the petitioner.
It finds mention in order, Annexure P-1, that petitioner while posted at Patti was found guilty of helping dreaded terrorists and also leaked out information regarding police raids on terrorists; accepted illegal gratification from the members of families of the terrorists for releasing them and hob nobbing with anti-social and anti-national elements who were posing threat to the security of the State.
It was thus opined that petitioner is guilty of grave misconduct thereby endangering the security of the State.
Petitioner has challenged the order of dismissal on the ground that the order against him has been passed at the instance of respondent No. 4 who was inimical against him because the petitioner had refused to oblige him when the petitioner was posted at Mohali, Tehsil Kharar, District Ropar.
It has also been averred that there is no evidence that petitioner had any links with terrorists and he has been helping the dreaded terrorists and leaking out information regarding police raids on the terrorists.
3.
Two sets of written statements have been filed; one by the official respondents and the other by respondent No. 4.
Respondents 1 and 2 in their written statement have made reference to adverse remarks in confidential reports of petitioner for the period from 971979 to 2631980, 20.8.1980 to 31.8.1980 and also for the period from 20.8.1980 to 22.1.1989 where his honesty was doubted.
It has also been averred that the petitioner was dismissed from service due to his own acts when he was posted as Deputy Superintendent of Police, Patti and the decision taken against him is final because of provisions of Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India.
Respondent No. 4 has denied that he was ever inimical towards the petitioner.
4.
Petitioner has also filed an additional affidavit in which he has submitted that he has come to know that on 27121988, respondent No. 4 intimated to the then Inspector General of Police (Border), Amritsar that a case has been registered against the petitioner along with Gulab Singh, Inspector and he requested that DSP (i.e. petitioner) be transferred out of the district immediately.
On receipt of this intimation, the Inspector General of Police (Border), Amritsar informed the Director General of Police that on the basis of information received, a case has been got registered against the petitioner and the petitioner be ordered to be transferred out of the district immediately.
Before any order could be passed, respondent No. 4 came to Chandigarh and met the Director General of Police and held a meeting with him in which it was decided to prepare a case for dismissal of petitioner from service.
In this regard, a DO letter was written to respondent No. 4 for sending a note as discussed in the meeting.
On 1211989, Deputy Inspector General of Police (Administration) Punjab again wrote a DO letter to respondent No. 4 stating that his note has been examined and he was asked to send information with regard to association of the petitioner with terrorists.
The Inspector General of Police again requested respondent No. 4 vide letter dated 1311989 to send the report on the points raised by the DIG of Police (Administration).
It has also been averred that comments were supplied by respondent No. 4 but the DGP's office was not satisfied for making out a case of dismissal by invoking Article 311(2)(c) of the Constitution and respondent No. 4 was informed that his report is not according to the information demanded by the Authorities and Inspector General of Police (Border), Amritsar was again requested to examine the case at his own level and send report as per decision taken in the meeting held with Director General of Police.
On the basis of information asked by DGP's office, the Inspector General of Police (Border) again asked respondent No. 4 to supply concrete information regarding petitioner's links with terrorists or leakage of information.
On the basis of information supplied, the impugned order has been passed.
According to the petitioner, the order has been passed against him at the instance or respondent No. 4 though there was no material linking the petitioner with terrorists.
5.
It stands settled by the Apex Court in AK Kaul and another v. Union of India and another, 1995(3) SCT 15(SC) : JT 1995(4) SC 1, the satisfaction of the President or the Governor under clause (c) of second proviso to Article 311(2) is not immune from judicial review and is justiciable.
In this context, the following observations need be noticed :-  "Under clause (c) of the second proviso to Article 311(2) the President or the Governor has to satisfy himself about the expediency in the interests of the security of the State to hold an enquiry as prescribed under Article 311(2).
Are the considerations involving the interests of the security of the State of such a nature as to exclude the satisfaction arrived at by the President or the Governor in respect of the matters from the field of justiciability ?
We do not think so.
Article 19(2) of the Constitution permits the State to impose, by law, reasonable restrictions in the interests of the security of the State on the exercise of the right to freedom of speech and expression conferred by sub-clause (a) of clause (1) of Article 19 The validity of the law imposing such restrictions under Article 19(2) is open to judicial review on the ground that the restrictions are not reasonable or they are not in the interests of the security of the State.
The Court is required to adjudicate on the question whether a particular restriction on the right to freedom of speech and expression is reasonable in the interests of the security of the State and for that purpose the Court takes into consideration the interests of the security of the State and the need of the restriction for protecting those interests.
If the Courts are competent to adjudicate on matters relating to the security of the State in respect of restrictions on the right to freedom of speech and expression under Article 19(2) there appears to be no reason why the Courts should not be competent to go into the question whether the satisfaction of the President or the Governor for passing an order under Article 311(2)(c) is based on considerations having a bearing on the interests of the security of the State.
While examining the validity of a law imposing restrictions on the right to freedom of speech and expression this Court has emphasised the distinction between security of the State and maintenance of public order and has observed that only serious and aggravated forms of public order which are calculated to endanger the security of the State would fall within the ambit of clause (2) of Article 19 (See: Romesh Thappar v. The State of Madras, 1950 SCR 594, at p. 601).
So also in Tulsiram Patel (supra) the Court has pointed out the distinction between the expressions 'security of the State', 'public order' and 'law and order' and has stated that situations which affect public order are graver then those which affect law and order and situations which affect security of the State are graver than those which after public order.
The President or the Governor while exercising the power under Article 311(2)(c) has to bear in mind this distinction between situations which affect the security of the State and the situations which affect public order or law and order and for the purpose of arriving at his satisfaction for the purpose of passing on order under Article 311(2)(c) the Presiding or the Governor can take into consideration only those circumstances which have bearing on the interests of the security of the State and not on situations having a bearing on law and order or public order.
The satisfaction of the President or the Governor would be vitiated if it is based on circumstances having no bearing on the security of the State.
(Emphasis supplied) If an order passed under Article 311(2)(c) is assailed before a court of law on the ground that the satisfaction of the President or the Governor is not based on circumstances which have a bearing on the security of the State the Court can examine the circumstances on which the satisfaction of the President or the Governor is based and if it finds that the said circumstances have no bearing on the security of the State the court can hold that the satisfaction of the President or the Governor which is required for passing such an order has been vitiated by wholly extraneous or irrelevant considerations."
In the context of judgment of the Apex Court referred to above, the impugned order needs to be viewed.
The order of dismissal against the petitioner has been passed on the ground that petitioner while posted at Patti was found guilty of helping dreaded terrorists and leaked out information regarding police raids on terrorists, and also accepted illegal gratification from the members of families of terrorists for releasing them and hob nobbing with anti-social and anti-national elements.
The case of the petitioner is that there is no material with the respondents in regard to acts attributed to him.
In order to ascertain the correctness of the allegations made against the petitioner learned Deputy Advocate General, Punjab was asked to produce the record.
The case was adjourned twice to enable him to produce the record but the record has not been produced.
The learned Deputy Advocate General, Punjab has stated at the Bar that the file is not available.
In absence of record, it has become difficult to examine whether satisfaction of the President of India is vitiated by mala fides or is based on wholly extraneous or irrelevant grounds.
Only the record would have shown the nature of activities in which petitioner is said to have indulged.
Accordingly, this Court has no option but to quash the order of dismissal.
6.
In the circumstances, the order of dismissal passed against the petitioner in exercise of powers under Article 311(2)(c) of the Constitution is quashed.
Petitioner is directed to be reinstated in service with all consequential benefits.
It is, however, made clear that it would be open to the respondents to initiate departmental proceedings, if they intend to hold one, in accordance with law.
The disciplinary Authority can exercise all powers conferred on it under the Punjab Police Rules, 1934.
7.
Consequently, the writ petition shall stand allowed.
No costs.
Petition allowed.