SS Sudhalkar, J - This writ petition is filed by a workman challenging the award of the Labour Court, Panipat in reference No. 218 of 1994.
The petitioner was working as a Chowkidar with respondents No. 2 and 3 and has alleged that his services were terminated without assigning any reason and without complying with the provisions of Section 25(F) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as the 'Act').
He was a monthly wage worker.
He had served a demand notice under Section 2 of the Act and the State Govt. referred the dispute to the Labour Court.
The petitioner filed a claim statement.
He has also contended that the termination of his service is an unfair labour practice because he had already completed 240 days and that after the termination of his service, the respondents No. 2 and 3 employed S/Shri Mahipal, Joginder and Narain etc. in place of the petitioner.
He was also not paid any retrenchment compensation and that respondents No. 2 and 3 have violated the provisions of Section 25(F) of the Act.
2.
The respondents No. 2 and 3 have filed the written statement before the Labour Court and the Labour Court had after considering the evidence adduced, came to the conclusion that it was duly proved that the termination of the petitioner was justified and was in accordance with law and therefore, the petitioner was not entitled to any relief.
3.
The respondents Nos. 2 and 3 submitted their written statement to the writ petition and have contended that the allegations made in the writ petition are not correct and that the petitioner has not worked for 240 days but has worked for only 209 days.
It is also contended that no appointment letter or termination letter was issued to the petitioner and whenever there was a demand on a specific work such like labour was employed according to the urgent need of the work.
4.
We have heard the learned Advocate for the petitioner and the learned Deputy Advocate General for the respondents.
The burden of proving that the petitioner has not worked for 240 days is certainly on the employer i.e. respondents No. 2 and 3 because they are having the best evidence i.e. muster roll or the payment sheets and the service of the petitioner being in the Government department, the amount will also be subjected to audit.
The respondents No. 2 and 3 being in the possession of best evidence, as per the principle laid down by the Supreme Court in Gopal Krishanji Ketkar v. Mohamed Haji Latif and others, A.I.R. 1968 S.C. 1413, the burden of proving the fact was on them as the party which possessed the best evidence, notwithstanding the fact that they were not called upon to produce the same.
In this case, the learned Labour Court has relied only on the oral evidence.
Mr. Raina has made a statement that there were oral instructions from the Executive Engineer, Karnal not to maintain the muster rolls from April, 1991 onwards.
In spite of this the Government department cannot be said to be run his business without maintaining anything regarding attendance of the workers, when the payment has to be made from the Govt. treasury.
The Govt. departments maintain accounts for the same and while maintaining the accounts, the calculation is also required to be made.
Therefore, only non- maintenance of muster rolls will not help the respondents.
5.
An affidavit dated 17496 of Mr. RK Malhotra, Sub Divisional Engineer/PWD, Public Health Sub Division Indri (Karnal) has been produced in this case.
He has stated on oath that the daily wagers were engaged on muster roll upto 4/91 in Public Health Division No. 1, Karnal and were paid accordingly.
He has also stated in the affidavit that with effect from 5/91 to 11/95, the daily wagers were engaged on monthly sanction basis in place of muster roll and were paid on the rates fixed by the Labour Commissioner, Haryana, Chandigarh/Deputy Commissioner from time to time and again procedure was adopted as stated above from 1996 in the Public Health Division No. 1.
This affidavit does not indicate that there is no other record to show the attendance of the workman paid from the Govt. treasury.
6.
The petitioner has also alleged that after his removal from service, others were appointed in his place.
If the petitioner had a right to continue in service, this is certainly an unfair labour practice.
7.
In view of the fact that no proper evidence has been produced before the Labour Court, we find if proper to remand the case to the Labour Court with a direction to record the evidence which may be led by the parties before it and to decide the case afresh after recording evidence and hearing the arguments, if any, advanced.
8.
In view of the above facts, we set aside the impugned award of the Labour Court and remand the matter back to the Labour Court with a direction to permit the parties to lead evidence and hear arguments and decided the matter afresh.