Asok Kumar Chakravarty, J - The petitioner's case in this writ application is that by resolution dated 15th May, 1984 of the Managing Committee of Tara Sundari Girls' Higher Secondary School, PO Nabadwip, District Nadia, the petitioner was selected for appointment to the post of Night Guard of the said School.
In terms of the said Resolution, the petitioner was appointed as Night Guard with effect from 19th May, 1984 and was given an assurance that he would be absorbed as Class IV staff as and when vacancy would arise.
On such assurance, the petitioner joined the said post of Night Guard.
Thereafter, on 27th November, 1989, the petitioner was directed by the Managing Committee to work in the Chemistry Laboratory as a helper.
He was also asked to work in other departments which he did to the entire satisfaction of the school authorities.
The first vacancy, it appears, in the Class IV staff of the said school occurred on superannuation of Radhika Mohan Majumdar on 28th Feb 1990 and the school authority's application thereafter to the District Inspector Schools for absorption of the petitioner in the said vacant post was rejected as the said vacant post was abolished.
On 21st September, 1991, the Secretary of the said school informed the petitioner that he had been confirmed as Nigh Guard with effect from 19th May, 1984.
Thereafter, another Class IV staff, Smt. Haridasi Dassi died in harness and the petitioner was also not absorbed in the said post as it was subsequently declared reserved for scheduled caste candidates.
In December 1992, another Class IV staff, Smt. Bina Dassi, retired from service and the application of the petitioner for absorption against her vacancy was also rejected on the ground that it was kept reserved for appointment for a candidate from the category of dependents of the staff who had died in harness.
In August 1993, yet another Class IV staff, Girindra Sarkar, retired and the school authorities was again approached by the petitioner for his absorption but no action was taken on such representation by the school authorities.
The petitioner, thereafter, filed a writ application before this Court and Mr. Justice Samaresh Banerjee, by his order dated 22nd April, 1994, disposed of the said writ application with certain direction upon the DI of Schools and also passed a restraint order.
In pursuance of the said order of this Court, the DI of Schools, on 8th June, 1994, heard the Secretary of the School, the Headmistress and also the petitioner and passed an order rejecting claim of the petitioner for his absorption in the post of a Class IV staff of the said school on the ground that his appointment was in violation of the Rules of appointment and the Managing Committee was not authorised either to appoint him or to pay him any salary for the said post.
2.
Being aggrieved by the aforesaid decision of the DI of Schools, the petitioner, on the basis of facts as mentioned above, moved this writ application praying for a direction upon the respondents to act according to law and to regularise the service of the petitioner as a Class IV staff of the Tara Sundari Girls' Higher Secondary School.
3.
In the A/O filed on behalf of respondents Nos. 1, 2 and 3, it was alleged that the said school had neither any vacant sanctioned post of Class IV staff nor any admissible fund at its disposal at the time of appointment of the petitioner.
It was further alleged that the Government cannot take any financial liability for any unauthorised appointment and the Secretary or the Managing Committee was not authorised to assure any person that he would be absorbed as a Class IV staff when any vacancy would arise ignoring the Government Rules, Government policy etc.
It was further alleged that the D.I of Schools (S.E.
), Nadia, by Memo No. 130(2) Law/S.E.
dated 3061994, having considered all aspects of the matter in accordance with law and in pursuance of the direction of this Court, found that the representation of the petitioner wasn't tenable in the eye of law and it cannot be considered for absorption to the post of Class IV staff of the said school.
4.
In their A/O the respondent Nos. 4, 5 and 6 have supported the case of the petitioner.
5.
In the A/R filed by the petitioner, it was alleged that the petitioner was paid his salary all along from the Development Fund of the said school and the relevant Audit Report, which must have been sent to the DI of Schools (S.E.
), Nadia by the school authorities, though showed such payment of salary to the petitioner from the School Fund was never objected to by the DI of Schools.
It was further alleged that on the basis of the definite assurance given by the school authorities, the petitioner had a legitimate expectation that he would be absorbed in the said post of Class IV staff of the said school.
It was further contended that having put in the service in the said school for a long time and having not looked for alternative employment elsewhere, he would not be able to procure appointment elsewhere as he was age-barred.
6.
Heard Mr. Subal Maitra learned Advocate for the petitioner, Miss Aruna Mukherjee for the respondent Nos. 1, 2 and 3 and Mrs. Keya Bhattacharyya for the respondents Nos. 4, 5 and 6.
7.
Admittedly, the petitioner was appointed as a Night Guard in the said school by a resolution of the Managing Committee dated 15th May, 1984 and since 19th May, 1984 the petitioner has been working in the said school as a Night Guard.
It is not also disputed that he was rendering satisfactory services to the school since his appointment and that his successive representations to the DI of Schools for his absorption as a Class IV staff have been turned own by the DI Schools.
It appears that this Court by order dated 22nd April, 1994 disposed of the writ application filed by the petitioner by directing the DI of Schools concerned to consider the representation of the petitioner dated 22nd March, 1994 and to dispose of the same by passing reasoned order upon hearing all the concerned parties, including the petitioner.
It appears that the DI of Schools in pursuance of the said order of this Court, disposed of the matter with the observation that the petitioner was appointed by the Managing Committee of the said concern in violation of the Recruitment Rules prevalent then as well as the Management Rules wherein it was contemplated that permission of the DI of School is necessary for appointment of any staff in a secondary school.
The representation of the petitioner dated 22nd March, 1994 is, thus, not tenable in the eye of law and as such he was not considered for absorption to the post of Class IV staff of the concerned school.
8.
Mr. Subal Maitra, learned Advocate appearing for the petitioner, has submitted that as the petitioner admittedly has been rendering his service in the said school from 1984 to the entire satisfaction of the school authorities, as will appear from the report of the DI of Schools, he ought to have been appointed to the admittedly vacant post of Class IV staff not only because of his continuous services in the said school but also because of his legitimate expectation to such post by reason of the assurance given by the school authority since 1984 and also on the ground of fair policy and justice.
For this purpose, he has referred to a decision of the Division Bench of this Court in the case of Ashok Kumar Biswas v. State of West Bengal reported in 1995(1) SCT 594 (Calcultta) : 1994 Lab IC 1043 wherein I was one of the Judges.
In the said case, upon consideration of the facts and circumstances of the case and upon consideration of the relevant Supreme Court decisions in the matter, it was held that if any assurance is given to any person for regularising his service on subsequent sanction of the post which was subsequently sanctioned, the action of the authorities in not appointing him amounts to denial of social justice affecting his right to livelihood.
In another decision referred to by the learned Advocate in the case of Headmaster, D.G.H.
School v. Pradip Mitra, reported in 1994(1) CHN 237, it was held that the Managing Committee was not entitled to prefer any appeal against the decision of the DI of School for absorption of a teacher as the incumbent had worked satisfactorily to the knowledge of the authority including the Managing Committee and that there was no complaint regarding his efficiency or integrity.
My attention was also drawn to two other decisions of the Supreme Court in the cases of Jacob M Puthuparambil v. Kerala Water Authority reported in 1991(1) SCT 627(SC) : AIR 1990 SC 2228 and also the case of State of Haryana v. Pyara Singh, reported in (1992)4 SCC 118 : 1992(3) SCT 201(SC), wherein it was held that those eligible and qualified and continuing in service satisfactorily for a long period have a right to be considered for regularisation as long as continuous service gives rise to a presumption of a need to have sanction of a regular post and that the question of regularisation should be considered in the light of the period of services rendered by the concerned employee and the possibility of not getting any alternative employment after spending a long time in a particular service and also the question of the conditions of the family if its bread earner is thrown out of employment.
9.
It was, however, submitted by Miss Mukherjee on behalf of the respondents Nos. 1, 2 and 3 that neither the relevant Govt. Order in Memo No. 1049/1(19) GA dated 2051993 nor any earlier order in Memo No. 2816(17) GA dated 4121989, which lays down the rules regarding recruitment to the post of teaching and non-teaching staffs of secondary schools, justify any appointment given by the Managing Committee of the school.
In this behalf reference was also made to the Rules for Management of Recognised Non-Govt. Institutions (Aided and Unaided), 1969.
In Rule 28(7) of the said Rules, it is provided that the Managing Committee shall not give any appointment if it is not against a sanctioned post - permanent or temporary.
In the instant case, no post of night guard was sanctioned at the time of appointment of the petitioner.
Miss Mukherjee submitted that the petitioner has no right to get appointment as a Class IV staff of the said school.
10.
Mrs. Keya Bhattacharyya, learned Advocate appearing for the respondents Nos. 4, 5 and 6 submitted that the post of a Night Guard was sanctioned on 31st August, 1993 and that there is no bar for appointment of the petitioner to the said sanctioned post.
11.
Upon careful consideration of the submission made by the learned Advocate for the parties, it is clear that the post of a Night Guard of the concerned school was not a sanctioned post at the time when the petitioner was appointed in 1984.
He was, accordingly, used to be paid at the rate of Rs. 100/- per month pending sanction of the said post by the Government.
The petitioner prayed for appointment to the post of a Class IV Staff on the ground that he had been working pursuant to an order of the Managing Committee as an attendant in the Chemistry, Physics and Biology Departments of the said school.
By so working, the petitioner was not entitled to claim for his appointment as class IV staff.
The appointment of the petitioner being to the post of a Night Guard and that post having not been sanctioned as Class IV staff since August 1993, the petitioner cannot have any claim for regular appointment to the post of a Night Guard.
Since the management under the Rules had no right to give any appointment under any circumstances to any person, any appointment made by it to any unsanctioned post without any authority or any assurance given by the Managing Committee to him in that behalf be taken to give rise to any legitimate expectations as there was never any appointment to any sanctioned post at the time of the appointment and that was created subsequent to such appointment.
12.
The question of having sympathetic consideration for person having rendered long period of Service however is immaterial for the purpose of regularisation of any post which had not been in existence at the time when the incumbent was appointed to the said post.
The Supreme Court in its subsequent decision has reconsidered the views about regularisation of the service of the persons rendering services for a period of time and the latest position of law, as laid down by the Supreme Court in this matter, is that long period of service shall not enure to the benefit of the incumbent unless the appointment is justified and is in terms of the law.
It was held that no appointment on humanitarian considerations should be allowed by passing the provision of law or rules laid down in this matter.
In this connection, I will refer to the latest decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Dr. Arundhati Ajit Pargaonkar v. State of Maharashtra reported in 1995(1) SCS Law Judgments 99 : 1994(4) SCT 398(SC).
Since the appointment of the petitioner, in the present case, was unauthorised from the verybeginning, question of regularisation of his service as Night Guard, and for that matter as a Class IV staff of the said school, does not and cannot arise.
13.
In view, however, of the fact that the petitioner has put in long years of service as a Night Guard in the said school and the post of a Night Guard has been sanctioned in August, 1993 and since one post of Class IV staff is lying vacant in the said school which requires to be filled up, the District Inspector of School concerned shall not fill up the said vacant post without taking interview of the petitioner by the school authority afresh for appointment in the said post along with other candidates who may be interviewed for selection to the post.
The age limit, if there be any, for selection to the said post shall not be considered in the case of the petitioner.
14.
The petitioner shall continue in the service until appointment is made to the said Class IV post, as directed above.
15.
The writ application is disposed of as above without any order as to costs.
Order accordingly.