GS Singhvi, J - In this petition, the petitioner has challenged the initiation of disciplinary proceedings against him vide Annexure P-5 without payment of salary and allowances.
2.
In brief the facts are that the petitioner who was employed with the State of India was prosecuted for the offences under Sections 420, 468 and 471 of the Indian Penal Code.
He was found guilty by the Judicial Magistrate Ist Class, Ferozepure and was sentenced to three years rigorous imprisonment with fine of Rs. 5000/- for different offences and to undergo further rigorous imprisonment in default of payment of fine.
In appeal, the petitioner was acquitted by the learned Additional Sessions Judge, Ferozepur who gave him the benefit of doubt.
3.
Thereafter the bank decided to initiate disciplinary enquiry against the petitioner and, therefore, Regional Manager, Region-V, of the State Bank of India issued charge-sheet Annexure P5-A to the petitioner for holding enquiry against him in accordance with the provisions of the Sastry Award.
4.
The petitioner has challenged the action of the Bank to initiate enquiry against him on the ground that after his acquittal by the Court of the Additional Sessions Judge, the employer could not initiate enquiry against him.
According to the petitioner, the findings recorded by the Additional Sessions Judge in regard to the alleged offences committed by the petitioner are final and, therefore, on the same set of allegations the enquiry could not be held by the Bank.
5.
The second ground of challenge to the impugned charge-sheet is that with his acquittal by the Court of the Additional Sessions Judge, the petitioner became entitled to be reinstated in service and also to be paid entire wages for the period during which he was treated under suspension and that without making payment of full salary, the petitioner could not be proceeded against by the way of disciplinary action.
6.
The respondents have contested the writ petition.
They have placed reliance on para 521 of the Sashtry Award which entitles an employer to take action against the employee who is convicted by the Court of competent jurisdiction at one time but is later on acquitted.
According to the respondents, the action has been initiated against the petitioner in accordance with para 521(2)(c) of the Sastry Award and while initiating departmental enquiry against the petitioner, the management took a decision not to give any benefit of the period of suspension to him.
The respondents have further averred that the management is vested with the discretion to decide as to what treatment should be meted out to the period during which the petitioner was facing trial in a court of law.
7.
While issuing notice of motion on 3151985, this Court had stayed further proceedings in pursuance of order Annexure P5 but while admitting the writ petition on 1791985, the Court modified the stay order and permitted the respondent-Bank to proceed with the enquiry subject to the condition that the petitioner was paid salary from 1081978 to 15.12.1982.
A further rider was imposed by the Court that the payment shall be subject to the decision of the writ petition.
8.
Since counsel for the parties have not appeared, it is not possible for the Court to know whether the enquiry initiated vide Annexure P5-A has concluded or not.
9.
Notwithstanding the fact that the Court has not been made aware of the fact of the enquiry initiated against the petitioner, in my opinion, the action of the employer in initiating enquiry against the petitioner after his acquittal by the Additional Sessions Judge cannot be termed as illegal.
The acquittal of the petitioner was not preceded by a finding that the charge levelled against him was frivolous or false.
He was simply given benefit of doubt.
It is well settled principle of law that the degree of proof required in the departmental enquiry is vastly different than the degree of proof required for proving a criminal charge.
In the departmental enquiry, the finding can be recorded on preponderance of probabilities and it is not necessary that the charge must be proved to the hilt.
Therefore, on the first principle the action taken by the respondent-Bank to initiate enquiry against the petitioner under para 521(2)(c) of the Sastry Award cannot be treated as without jurisdiction.
10.
A look at the provisions of para 521(2)(c) of the Sastry Award which is a bilateral settlement between the employer and the employee shows that by virtue of this settlement, the employer is vested with the jurisdiction to proceed departmentally against the employee who is acquitted by the Court of law more so when the acquittal is by giving him benefit of doubt.
11.
The grievance of the petitioner that he could not have been treated under suspension with retrospective effect and, thus, he could not have been demied the benefit of salary for the period from 1081978 to 15.12.1982 merits acceptance only to a limited extent.
No doubt, the employer is possessed with the power to take a decision about the treatment to be meted out to the period as suspension but before passing any adverse order, the employer is bound to give an action-oriented notice and an opportunity of hearing.
From the record, it appears that no opportunity of hearing was afforded to the petitioner before passing an order of denial of salary to him.
12.
Consequently, the writ petition is dismissed insofar as it relates to the challenge to the charge sheet Annexure P5-A However, the action of the management in treating the entire period of suspension as not spent on duty and denial of salary is quashed on the ground of violation of the principles of natural justice.
Liberty is, however, given to the employer to pass an appropriate order in the case of the petitioner after giving a notice and an opportunity of hearing to him.
13.
If at all during the pendency of the writ petition, the enquiry has already been finalised by the respondents, any observation made in this order shall not adversely affect the decision taken by the employer.
Ordered accordingly.