THB Chalapathi, J - The petitioner filed this writ petition invoking certiorarial jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India for quashing the order of the Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court dated 791993.
2.
The 2nd respondent Babu Ram was employed in the petitioner's Mills as a Senior Time Keeper.
In July, 1980 he made corrections in the dates of birth of the two of the workmen namely Gurdayal, Daftri and Faquir Singh Jamadar.
On the ground that the said corrections were made without authority, a charge sheet dated 9/11.12.1981 was served on the 2nd respondent.
In reply thereto, the 2nd respondent admitted having corrected the dates of birth in discharge of his duties on the ground and for reasons genuine.
He has also mentioned that he has already given explanation in his previous letter.
Therefore, he requested to close the file.
Not satisfied with the explanation, the Management ordered an enquiry and appointed an Enquiry Officer by an order of General Manager dated 2861982.
The Enquiry Officer held enquiry after giving the notice to the 2nd respondent.
During the enquiry, the 2nd respondent requested the Enquiry Officer to allow him to be represented by one Jagmohan Lal and also requested to conduct the enquiry outside the premises of the Mills as the said Jagmohan Lal was not permitted by the management to enter the premises of the Mills.
But this request was turned down by the Enquiry Officer on the ground that Jagmohan Lal was asked to join his duties but the fact remains that the said Jagmohan Lal did not join his duties.
Therefore, he could not enter the premises of the Mills and he could not represent the workman.
Therefore, the workman did not participate in the enquiry that took place after 7121984.
The Enquiry Officer found that the 2nd respondent corrected the dates of birth of the two workmen namely Gurdayal Singh and Faquir Singh causing financial loss to the Mills.
On the basis of the enquiry report a show cause notice was issued to the workman to show cause why he should not be dismissed from service.
Thereafter, the petitioner filed an application under Section 33(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act for approval of the orders of the termination of service of the 2nd respondent-workman.
The Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Rohtak, entertained the application and after holding an enquiry came to the conclusion that the termination of service of the workman-2nd respondent is illegal and set aside the same.
Challenging the said order of the Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Rohtak, the petitioner filed this writ petition.
3.
The learned counsel for the petitioner contended that the Labour Court erred in reviewing the evidence placed before the Enquiry Officer which is not permissible under law and though the workman participated in enquiry up to 7121984 and thereafter he remained absent and did not participate in the enquiry and admittedly, the workman made the corrections in the dates of birth of two of the workmen namely Gurdayal Singh and Faquir Singh and when the same was admitted and when it was not shown that the corrections in the dates of birth were made under any authority, the services of the workman were validly and legally terminated and, therefore, the orders of the Industrial Tribunal- cum-Labour Court are liable to be set aside.
4.
It is on the other hand contended by the learned counsel appearing for the 2nd respondent that though the respondent-workman admitted corrections in the dates of birth, he has done the same in accordance with the practice prevalent in the Mills for correction of dates of birth and if there is any mistake it is a bona fide mistake which does not entitle the Management to terminate the services of workman.
When the action of the respondent-workman is a bona fide one, the severe punishment of termination of services cannot be imposed and, therefore, there are no grounds warranting any interference with the orders of the Industrial Tribunal-cum- Labour Court by this Court.
5.
There is no dispute of the fact that the workman-2nd respondent corrected the dates of the birth of Gurdayal Singh, who has been working as Daftri and Faquir Singh who has been working as Jamadar.
The corrections were made on the basis of the dates of birth as entered in the school leaving certificate of Gurdayal Singh and the Military Discharge Certificate of Faquir Singh.
On the basis of documentary evidence the respondent-workman made the corrections.
It has come on record that the predecessor who has been working earlier to Babu Ram as Senior Time Keeper also made corrections in the same way in the dates of birth of Khem Chand, Dalipa, Ram Sarup and Daya Chand and the corrections made by the predecessor of the 2nd respondent have been acted upon by the Management without any demur and it does not appear from the evidence on record produced before the Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court that any action was taken against the then Time Keeper for making corrections in the dates of birth.
The Management failed to produce any documentary proof that there was any standard procedure prescribed either in the Rules or in the Circulars in regard to the corrections of dates of birth of the workmen.
The fact that there were corrections of dates of birth in the service register of the workmen prior to the corrections made by Babu Ram was borne out from the record.
Even during the enquiry before the Enquiry Officer one Kanwar Singh who has been examined by the Management clearly admitted that some changes in the dates of birth have been effected earlier in the service registers of the workmen.
Though he added that the corrections had been made by the time office after proper permission of the General Manager but the Management failed to produce any approval of the General Manager authorising time office to make the corrections in the dates of birth made in the service registers.
6.
Thus it is the main contention of the 2nd respondent workman before the Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court that the practice prevalent in the Mills in regard to the change of dates of birth was the concerned time keeper after satisfying himself about the correct dates of birth used to change the dates of birth in accordance with the material produced by the workmen.
In the instant case, the workman i.e. the 2nd respondent made the corrections in the dates of birth of Gurdayal Singh and Faquir Singh on the basis of the School Leaving Certificate which shows the date of birth of Gurdayal Singh and on the basis of Military Discharge Certificate in the case of Faquir Singh.
Therefore, it cannot be said that the corrections were made by Babu Ram the workman without any material.
7.
The only question that is to be considered in this writ petition is whether the workman Babu Ram made the corrections under bona fide mistake.
As already observed, the Management failed to produce any circular or standing order or any procedure prescribed by the Management in regard to the corrections of date of birth to be made in the service registers of the workmen.
Further on 2981980.
Faquir Singh made an application for correction in the date of retirement on reaching the age of superannuation.
The same was endorsed to the time office for a report by the Managing Director.
The workman Babu Ram who was working at that time as Senior Time Keeper reported that as per the Military Certificate he has already made the correction in the Register.
Thereafter, the Managing Director has not taken any objection in regard to the action of the workman Babu Ram.
He only wanted certain information in regard to the proof of age submitted by the workman at the time of entry in the service of the Mills.
This is evident from the endorsement of the Managing Director dated 1091980 on the application of Faquir Singh.
Thus even on 1091980, the Managing Director did not point out that the 2nd respondent acted contrary to any instructions or circular issued by the Management with regard to the changes or corrections to be made in the service registers in respect of the dates of birth of the workmen of the Mills.
When in the past, Senior Time Keeper was making the corrections on his own, there is nothing wrong with the 2nd respondent in following the same procedure while making corrections in the dates of birth of Gurdayal Singh and Faquir Singh.
It is not the case of the Management that the 2nd respondent made the corrections with any ulterior or oblique motive.
If there is any mistake it must be bona fide one as the 2nd respondent merely followed the procedure adopted by his predecessor in office.
It cannot be said that the corrections are made under mistake because there is no procedure prescribed by the Mills in regard to the corrections to be made in the dates of birth.
Therefore, I am of the opinion that the services of the 2nd respondent cannot be terminated simply on the ground that he admittedly made the corrections in the service register with regard to the dates of birth of the workmen.
When a person acts bona fide without any ulterior motive, he cannot be penalised particularly so in the absence of any procedure laid down by Mills.
In this view of the matter I need not consider the other points raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the Labour Court has re-appreciated the evidence and went into the legality of the enquiry proceedings.
In this view of the matter, I do not find any grounds warranting interference with the orders of the Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Rohtak.
The writ petition is, therefore, liable to be dismissed.
The writ petition is, accordingly dismissed.
No order as to costs.