VK Jhanji, J.- In this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, Dr. Avtar Singh, now represented by legal representatives, is seeking a writ in the nature of Certiorari quashing order dated 1151990, Annexure P- 10, whereby he has been dismissed from service and also dated 1011991, Annexure P-15, whereby his review application preferred against order dated 1151990 has been dismissed.
2.
In the year, 1974, services of the petitioner who was PCMS-II in the State of Punjab were placed with the Chandigarh Administration.
Petitioner was posted at Manimajra.
In the year 1976, petitioner was promoted as PCMS-I on the basis of his seniority and good service record.
In the same year, petitioner was posted as Medical Officer of Health in the Union Territory of Chandigarh.
While the petitioner was serving with the Union Territory, Chandigarh, one Mohinder Singh, Sanitary Inspector in the Health Department of UT Chandigarh filed a complaint dated 9101980 against the petitioner, alleging that he is in possession of assets disproportionate to his source of income and that he has amassed money by means of corruption.
An enquiry was ordered by the Chief Commissioner, UT Chandigarh.
Later, Mohinder Singh withdrew his complaint by filing affidavit dated 28111980 stating that the complaint filed by him is based on wrong information and he feels regret for the same.
However, the Director, Health Services, UT Chandigarh served a show-cause notice dated 7.1.1981 seeking explanation of the petitioner on the complaint filed by Mohinder Singh.
Petitioner filed a detailed reply and affidavit dated 1.1.1981 explaining that there is no difference between the income and expenditure.
It has been averred by the petitioner in his petition that the Director, Health Services as well as the Chief Commissioner were not satisfied with the reply filed by him and therefore, the Chief Commissioner ordered the Vigilance Cell.
UT Chandigarh to hold preliminary enquiry to look into the allegations of corruption.
It is the case of the petitioner that Vigilance cell made an enquiry and submitted its report to the Director, Health Services in the year 1981-82, but the report of the preliminary enquiry was not supplied to the petitioner.
Petitioner was reverted to the State of Punjab.
The record of the enquiry proceedings was handed over to the parent State.
Respondent No. 1 issued charge-sheet to the petitioner vide memo dated 22111983 under rule 8 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970.
Petitioner filed interim reply dated 17121984 to the charge- sheet, giving details of his income and expenditure during the year 1980.
In his reply, petitioner also requested that the departmental file be summoned and he be allowed to inspect the same.
Respondent No. 1 was not satisfied with the reply filed by the petitioner and decided to hold departmental enquiry into the charges.
On 811985, one Gurdial Singh, Deputy Director, was appointed as an Enquiry Officer and later on, on 2241985 the enquiry was entrusted to Enquiry Officer, Vigilance, Punjab.
After enquiry, the Inquiry Officer submitted his report to respondent No. 1 in November, 1986.
On 1151990, respondent No. 1 ordered the dismissal of the petitioner from service.
Petitioner was served with the order along with copy of the enquiry report.
Petitioner filed representation to respondent No. 1 for review of the said order, but no decision was taken by respondent No. 1.
Per force the petitioner filed Civil Writ Petition No. 11786 of 1990 in this Court, challenging the enquiry report and the charge-sheet and also the dismissal order.
The writ petition was disposed of by the Division Bench with a direction to the competent Authority to decide the review petition of the petitioner expeditiously, preferably within a period of three months by passing a well-reasoned and speaking order.
Pursuant to the order passed in the writ petition, petitioner filed another review petition on 1291990 giving all the details, for consideration by the competent Authority.
Respondent No. 1 vide order dated 1011991 dismissed the review petition.
Order of dismissal and also the order dismissing the review petition are being challenged in this petition inter alia on the ground that the same are illegal, arbitrary and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
3.
In his written statement, respondent No. 1 has admitted that a copy of the enquiry report was sent to the petitioner for the first time along with the dismissal order.
Order dismissing the petitioner from service is being defended on the ground that on finding the reply of the petitioner to the charge-sheet as unsatisfactory, an enquiry under rule 8 of the 1970 Rules was ordered to be held against the petitioner.
The Inquiry Officer after giving sufficient opportunity to the petitioner gave his report in which charges levelled against the petitioner have been proved and therefore, it has been averred that the order of dismissal is not illegal as alleged by the petitioner.
As regards the order passed in review, respondent No. 1 has averred that the review petition was examined at an appropriate level and was rejected by the Governor of Punjab under Rule 21 of the 1970 Rules.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has made the following submissions:  i) That the Disciplinary Authority on receipt of the enquiry report was of the view that only punishment of reduction in time scale for two years should be imposed but the order of dismissal has been passed at the insistence of Punjab Public Service Commission (in short the Commission) and therefore, respondent No. 1 having not applied its mind before passing the order, the order deserves to be quashed on this score alone; ii) that the impugned orders have been passed in the name of respondent No. 1 against which no appeal lies to any appellate Authority.
According to the counsel, in view of the drastic consequences which ensue a non-appealable order the rules of natural justice have to be fully complied with.
He also contended that although this court had directed respondent No. 1 to pass a speaking order on the review petition filed by the petitioner, but the order passed is again a laconic and non-speaking one; iii) that the enquiry report submitted in this case is not an enquiry inasmuch as the Inquiry Officer has failed to examine, analyse and appraise the evidence before him, rather the enquiry report is based on surmises and conjectures.
In answer to these submissions, the learned counsel for the State has submitted that the disciplinary proceedings were initiated against the petitioner as it had come to the notice of the Authorities that he was in possession of assets disproportionate to known source of income during the period he had worked with the Union Territory, Chandigarh.
He further contended that the enquiry was held in accordance with rules and regulations and is not illegal, arbitrary or violative of principles of natural justice, as has been contended by counsel for the petitioner.
5.
As regards the first contention of counsel for the petitioner, it is to be noticed that the Inquiry Officer submitted his report to respondent No. 1 in November 1986.
However, it remained pending with respondent No. 1 till 14.8.1987 when respondent No. 1 wrote letter No. 18/43/84/4HBI/19235 seeking advice of the Commission on the basis of enquiry report.
Respondent No. 1 in its letter to the Commission informed that this was a case of reduction to a lower scale for a period of two years.
The Commission did not agree with the views of respondent No. 1 and vide letter dated 19101988 recommended the punishment of dismissal.
Respondent No. 1 again recommended to the Commission vide letter dated 2411989 reiterating that it is not a case of disproportionate assets but a case in which no prior permission was taken before the property was sold/purchased and so, the penalty of reduction of pay scale is appropriate.
However, the Commission again wrote back to respondent No. 1 that punishment of dismissal is appropriate.
Respondent No. 1 in the written statement has admitted that the competent Authority decided to award the major penalty of reduction to a lower stage in the time scale for a period of two years, but when the matter was referred to the Commission, the Commission did not accept the recommendation.
It has also been averred that the advice/approval of the Commission is binding on the State Government and therefore, the competent Authority passed an order on 26.4.1990 that "Considering the facts and circumstances of the case Government may accept the recommendations of the Punjab Public Service Commission and award the punishment of dismissal from service to the petitioner".
Reply of the Government as stated in paras 11 and 12 of the written statement has, thus, revealed that respondent No. 1 on the basis of enquiry report and material on record was satisfied that it is not a case of disproportionate assets and for that matter, it recommended that penalty of reduction of pay scale is appropriate, but since the Commission did not approve of the recommendation, the order of dismissal came to be passed against the petitioner.
Rules do not provide that advice of the Commission is binding on the Disciplinary Authority.
Rather, in law, the Disciplinary Authority is not bound by the advice of the Commission but has to consider the evidence before him and though he has to consider Inquiry Officer's report, but he is not bound by the latter's finding as well.
What is provided under clause (ii)(a) and (b) of sub-rule 4 of rule 9 of 1970 Rules is that where the Punishing Authority finds it necessary to consult the Commission, the record of the enquiry together with a copy of notice given to the Government and representation made in pursuance of such notice shall be forwarded by the Punishing Authority to the Commission for its advice and the Punishing Authority after considering the representation made by the Government employee and the advice given by the Commission, shall determine as to what penalty should be imposed upon the Government employee and shall make such order as it thinks fit.
Rule does not provide that the advice of the Commission is binding on the Disciplinary Authority and therefore, the stand taken by respondent No. 1 that the advice of the Commission is binding is not correct.
It, thus, stands established that respondent No. 1 was influenced by the opinion of the Commission with whom he consulted with a view to obtain its advice on the case.
The conclusion of respondent No. 1 is based on the advice tendered by the Commission and thus, was not arrived at independently on the basis of the charges and relevant material placed before the Inquiry Officer in support of the charges and defence of the petitioner.
In fact the final conclusion of the Disciplinary Authority was so much at variance with the advice of the Commission that it is impossible to say that respondent No. 1 was not in any manner influenced by the advice tendered by the Commission.
Respondent No. 1 having not applied its independent mind to the material before it, the order deserves to be quashed on this score alone.
6.
Coming to the second contention of counsel for the petitioner, viz, the impugned orders have been passed in utter disregard to the principles of natural justice as at no stage the petitioner was given any opportunity to challenge the enquiry report.
It is the admitted case of the parties that copy of enquiry report was supplied to the petitioner for the first time along with the order of dismissal.
In the case of orders from which appeal lies, the delinquent has an opportunity to challenge the findings of the Disciplinary Authority in appeal.
There the delinquent can attack the conclusions of the Inquiry Officer and the procedure followed in the departmental enquiry.
Furthermore, he has the opportunity to satisfy the Disciplinary Authority about his innocence.
For this purpose, a copy of the enquiry report is supplied to the delinquent along with order of punishment.
However, in the present case, the impugned orders, Annexures P-10 and P-15 were passed in the name of the President of India by respondent No. 1.
Rule 14 provides that no appeal shall lie against the order made by the Governor.
Therefore, obviously there is no appeal from the said orders and for that matter when the petitioner was supplied with a copy of the enquiry report along with the order of dismissal, he made representation on 1861990 against the order of dismissal, but no decision was taken by respondent No. 1 on his representation.
Petitioner per force had to file Civil Writ Petition No. 11786 of 1990 and on 6.9.1990 the Division Bench directed the Competent Authority to decide the representation by passing a well-reasoned and speaking order.
This course was adopted by the Division Bench as the Division Bench was alive to the grievance made by the petitioner that no opportunity had been provided to him to attach the report of Inquiry Officer.
Despite the directions of the Division Bench to respondent No. 1 to pass a well-reasoned and speaking order, Annexure P-15 which has been passed has not dealt with the detailed review petition which runs into 15 pages.
The order only states "And whereas, after considering carefully, there has been found no reason or justification to accept the review petition filed by Dr. Avtar Singh.
Various charges have been established beyond doubt and the evidence has been conclusive.
It has been established beyond doubt that Dr. Avtar Singh violated the conduct rules as he had possessed assets disproportionate to his known sources of income and he acquired/purchased property violative of the conduct rules."
The order gives no indication that the Disciplinary Authority was alive to the grounds taken in the review petition, rather it shows that respondent No. 1 did not apply its mind at all though he was required to do so under the orders of this court passed in Civil Writ Petition No. 11786 of 1990.
The order passed in review suffers from the defect of non-application of mind and thus, not only the order passed in review but also the order of dismissal have to be set aside because the petitioner at no stage was given any opportunity to challenge the enquiry report.
For this view, I am supported by a judgment of Apex Court in Surjit Ghosh v. The Chairman and Managing Director, United Commercial Bank and others, 1995(2) SCT 352(SC) : 1995(2) SCC.
474, wherein it has been held that when there is a provision of appeal against the order of Disciplinary Authority and when the appellate Authority or the higher authority against whose order there is no appeal, exercises the powers of the Disciplinary Authority in a given case, it results in discrimination against the employee concerned.
This is particularly so when there are no guidelines in the Rules/Regulations as to when the higher authority or the appellate Authority should exercise the powers of the Disciplinary Authority.
7.
Before considering the third contention of counsel for the petitioner, it would be appropriate to notice few judgments on the subject.
In Union of India v. HC Goel, A.I.R. 1964 SC 364, it has been held that if the conclusion, upon consideration of evidence, reached by the Disciplinary Authority is perverse or suffers from patent errors or is based on no evidence at all, a writ of certiorari could be issued.
In Anil Kumar v. Presiding Officer and others, A.I.R. 1985 SC 1121, it has been held that the enquiry report must show the application of mind on the part of Inquiry Officer and further, the Inquiry Officer must disclose the reasons for relying on the evidence of prosecution in preference to that of defence.
The relevant observations are as under :-  "It is well-settled that a disciplinary enquiry has to be a quasi- judicial enquiry held according to the principles of natural justice and the Enquiry Officer has a duty to act judicially.
The Enquiry Officer did not apply his mind to the evidence.
Save setting out the names of the witnesses, he did not discuss the evidence.
He merely recorded his apse dixit that the charges are proved.
He did not assign a single reason why the evidence produced by the appellant did not appeal to him or was considered not credit- worthy.
He did not permit a peep into his mind as to why the evidence produced by the management appealed to him in preference to the evidence produced by the appellant.
An enquiry report in a quasi-judicial enquiry must show the reasons for the conclusion.
It cannot be an ipse-dixit of the Enquiry Officer.
It has to be a speaking order in the sense that the conclusion is supported by reasons.
This is too well-settled to be supported by a precedent.
In Madhya Pradesh Industries Ltd v. Union of India, (1966)1 SCR.
466 : A.I.R. 1966 SC 671, this court observed that a speaking order will at best be a reasonable and at its worst be at least a plausible one.
The public should not be deprived of this only safeguard.
Similarly in Mahabir Prasad vs. State of Uttar Pradesh, (1970) SCR 201 : A.I.R. 1970 SC 1302, this court reiterated that satisfactory decision of a disputed claim may be reached only if it be supported by the most cogent reasons that appealed to the authority.
It should all the more be so where the quasi- judicial enquiry may result in deprivation of livelihood or attach a stigma to the character."
In JS Gulati v. Improvement Trust, Ludhiana and others, 1983(2) S.L.R.
100, it has been held by this court that "the Enquiry Officer should have carefully examined and appraised the evidence, documentary as well as oral, adduced by the parties in support of each charge, he was not required to write judgment, still he had to indicate as to what was the evidence on which he was relying.
No doubt he could draw his own inferences from oral and documentary evidence and base his conclusions thereon.
Strangely in the enquiry report there is no reference to the evidence of any witness or document.
After reading the report, one does not come to know if any witness was examined at all.
There is not even a whisper of what was stated by the witness what to say of any discussion of the same.
A departmental inquiry is a serious and solemn affair.
The witnesses are examined and evidence produced to establish the charges.
A delinquent is given an opportunity to cross-examine the witnesses and adduce evidence.
This process is undergone in order to reach the truth.
This is not just a ritual.
The evidence has to be examined and analysed and appraised by the Inquiry Officer.
He has to base his conclusion on such appraisal.
The Inquiry Officer is not an arbitrator."
Recently, in BC Chaturvedi v Union of India and others, 1996(1) SCT 617(SC) : JT 1995(8) SC 65, it has been held by the Apex Court that judicial review is not an appeal from a decision, but a review of the manner in which it is made.
The Apex Court held "Power of judicial review is meant to ensure that the individual receives fair treatment and not to ensure that the conclusion which the authority reaches is necessarily correct in the eye of the court.
When an inquiry is conducted on charges of misconduct by a public servant, the Court/Tribunal is concerned to determine whether the inquiry was held by a competent officer or whether rules of natural justice are complied with.
Whether the findings or conclusions are based on some evidence, the authority entrusted with the power to hold inquiry has jurisdiction, power and authority to reach a finding of fact or conclusion.
But that finding must be based on some evidence.
Neither the technical rules of Evidence Act nor of proof of fact or evidence as defined therein, apply to disciplinary proceeding.
When the authority accepts that evidence and conclusion receives support therefrom, the disciplinary authority is entitled to hold that the delinquent officer is guilty of the charge.
The Court/Tribunal in its power of judicial review does not act as appellate authority to re-appreciate the evidence and to arrive at its own independent findings on the evidence.
The Court/Tribunal may interfere where the authority held the proceedings against the delinquent officer in a manner inconsistent with the rules of natural justice or in violation of statutory rules prescribing the mode of inquiry or where the conclusion or finding reached by the disciplinary authority is based on no evidence.
If the conclusion or finding be such as no reasonable person would have ever reached, the Court/Tribunal may interfere with the conclusion or the finding, and mould the relief so as to make it appropriate to the facts of each case."
It, thus, stands settled that in disciplinary enquiry which affects the livelihood of an individual and casts stigma, it is required that the Inquiry Officer after carefully examining, appraising and evaluating the evidence, documentary as well as oral, adduced by the parties in support of each charge, must record finding separately in each charge.
Judicial review is permissible only to the extent where the court finds that the proceeding held against the delinquent employee was inconsistent with the rules of natural justice or in violation of statutory rules or the finding reached by the discilplinary authority is based on no evidence.
Where the finding is unsupported by any evidence or is based on no evidence or shocks the conscience of the Court, the Court would be empowered to alter or interfere with the finding and the penalty imposed on the delinquent.
In cases where the delinquent is aggrieved of the finding of the Inquiry Officer on the ground that relevant evidence on record, may be oral or documentary, has not been considered, the course open is to agitate the matter in an appeal or where the appeal is not provided, to agitate by way of the review and in such circumstances, the appellate/reviewing Authority is to pass a well-reasoned and speaking order.
8.
In order to appreciate the third contention of counsel for the petitioner, it would now be appropriate to lay down the charges served on the petitioner before enquiry :  "(1) That during the year 1980, he had been in possession of assets amounting to Rs. 1,94,000/- disproportionate to his known sources of income, which he was not able to satisfactorily account for and thereby he had failed to maintain absolute integrity and had contravened rule 3 (1) of the Government Employees (Conduct) Rules, 1966.
(2) (a) That he had acquired by purchase on 461978 a House at Chandigarh and subsequently had disposed of by sale on 20.10.1980 the said residential site, all without the previous knowledge of the Govt. (b) That he through his wife had borrowed on 1091980 a sum of Rs. 60,000/- from Smt. Daljit Kaur through her husband Sh. Charan Singh, a person within the local limits of his authority with whom he was likely to have official dealings.
(c) That he had purchased on 261980 a new scooter No. DEN-4251 for Rs7,000/- and sold.
on 1191980 his old scooter No. CHG-4923 for Rs. 5,500/- but had failed to report to the Government these transactions concerning his movable property; thereby he had failed to maintain devotion to duty, and had contravened Rule 3(ii) of the Government Employees (Conduct) Rules, 1966".
In answer to the charges, petitioner vide his interim reply dated 17121984 submitted that a detailed probe into the matter had already been done by the Vigilance Cell, UT Chandigarh and the Administration Department (Health Department) U.T.
and on the basis of enquiry, the then Chief Commissioner was satisfied with the sources explained by the petitioner and after completion of enquiry, the then Chief Secretary, Punjab, heard the petitioner in person and decided to close the matter in view of wide difference of opinion between the Administrative Department Officers, i.e. D.S.F.-cum-Deputy Secretary, Health/FS-Cum-Health Secretary and the Vigilance Inspector.
However, along with the interim reply he furnished the incoming and out-goings received and spent during the year 1980.
He also furnished supporting documents in the form of affidavits, confirmatory letters, statement of Accounts, Memorandum of gift-deeds, copies of receipts and copy of assessment order from the Income- Tax Department for financial year 1980-81.
In regard to the second charge, petitioner submitted that no purchase was effected of a residential site on 461978, but a residential site at Mohali was purchased on 461976 before he joined on the post of Health Officer in Union Territory, Chandigarh and subsequently it was sold on 29101980 to repay the loan after obtaining due clearance from the Income-tax Department.
A house was also purchased at Chandigarh on 1291980 and intimation in this regard was sent.
Apart from this, he submitted that his wife took loan of Rs. 60,000/- on 1091980 from Smt. Daljit Kaur and a new scooter for Rs. 7,000/- was purchased in 1980 from an authorised dealer, which was booked in the year 1970.
This scooter was purchased after selling the old scooter No. CHG-4923 for Rs. 5,500/-.
Along with his reply, petitioner sent certificates of distinction which he had earned during his entire service period, and also gave the details of loan which he had received for the purchase of house at Chandigarh.
In the enquiry proceedings, the department examined 16 witnesses in support of their case.
Petitioner also examined one Daya Chand, besides giving his own statement.
The Inquiry Officer in his report dated 28111986 opined that the complaint made by Mohinder Singh (though later on he refiled from his statement) stands fully established regarding purchase of residential plot and its subsequent sale, purchase of built-up house at Chandigarh, and that the said transactions were duly financed by unexplained sources of the petitioner and there was no reason why he should not have obtained permission of the competent authority before entering into such purchase/sale.
In the concluding paragraph, he held that as per evidence led by the department and the petitioner and his reply to the questions put by the Inquiry Officer, it is established beyond doubt that various charges against the petitioner being in possession of assets disproportionate to his known sources of income during the year 1980 are fully established.
Regarding the purchase and sale of scooter, residential plot, built-up house or his raising loan during the year 1980 itself are subservient to the main charge which stands thoroughly established.
9.
Challenge made to the report and conclusions arrived at by the Inquiry Officer are on the ground that though the department examined 16 witnesses but the Inquiry Officer did not discuss the statement of any of the witnesses.
Besides this, it has also been submitted that petitioner also produced one person namely Daya Chand but the Inquiry Officer did not care to discuss his evidence.
Daya Chand had stated that petitioner wrote letter dated 27101980 to the Director, Health Services.
Punjab informing him about his intention to sell a plot which was later on sold on 29101980.
He had further stated that the petitioner had written another letter to respondent No. 4 informing him about the purchase of house at Chandigarh.
The witness produced the despatch register of the office of Medical Officer of Health, Chandigarh.
Challenge is also on the ground that the statement of Kehar Singh, D.S.P.
(Vigilance) had not been taken note of.
According to the counsel, this witness not only conducted the preliminary enquiry but had also stated that all the persons who advanced loan to the petitioner had admitted before him (Kehar Singh) that they had advanced loan to the petitioner.
Counsel further contended that he is not asking this court to analyse and appraise the evidence led before the Inquiry Officer but his effort is to show that the report consists of only surmises and conjectures since the evidence which could have exposed the falsehood of the charges levelled against the petitioner has intentionally not been referred to by the Inquiry Officer.
10.
It is true that the evidence, mention of which has been made by counsel for the petitioner, has not been dealt with by the Inquiry Officer, but this by itself is not sufficient enough to exercise the power of judicial review because it cannot be said that the enquiry report is based on no evidence.
Regarding the grievance that entire evidence has not been considered by the Inquiry Officer or the disciplinary Authority, the matter could have been agitated in appeal but in this case, since no appeal is provided against the order passed in the name of the President of India, the Disciplinary Authority was requited to deal with the objections of the petitioner, against the report, in review.
This has not been done by respondent No. 1 despite the direction given by this court.
He has failed to deal with the grounds taken by the petitioner in his review petition and the order passed is not a well- reasoned and speaking one and, therefore, the impugned orders have to be quashed.
11.
On quashing of the orders, Annexures P-10 and P-15, the usual course would have been to ask respondent No. 1 to pass a well-reasoned and speaking order afresh, but no useful purpose would be served in doing so since the petitioner has died during the pendency of writ petition.
Accordingly, orders dated 1151990 and 1011991 (Annexures P-10 and P-15 respectively) shall stand quashed.
Consequent upon quashing of these orders, respondent No. 1 is directed to give, to the legal representatives/heirs of the petitioner, all the consequential benefits to which the petitioner, if alive, would have been entitled to receive.
Let the direction be complied with within a period of two months from the date of communication of order from this court.
12.
The writ petition stands allowed in the aforesaid terms.
No costs.
Petition Allowed.