RLAnand, J - Point in issue in the present writ petition remains of academic importance for us as well as for the petitioner in view of the stay order dated 8111995 granted by this court whereby it was ordered that the petitioner would not be prematurely retired on the basis of the impugned notice dated 581995 issued by Respondent No. 2 as the petitioner was otherwise going to retire on the 31st March, 1996.
2.
Dharam Paul, the present petitioner has filed the present writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India praying for the issuance of a writ, order or direction in the nature of certiorari mandamus praying that the notice dated 581995 of premature, compulsory retirement be quashed and respondent No. 2 be called upon to restore the full pay of the petitioner consequent upon the favourable appellate order and for the grant of additional PROP increments due to the petitioner besides his placement in the revised pay scale effective from 191994.
3.
The main grievance of the petitioner is against the alleged mala fide order dated 381995 passed by respondent No. 2 whereby the petitioner was served with a three months' notice of premature, compulsory retirement.
According to the petitioner, the impugned notice cannot be said to be in public interest for the reason that the last ten reports of the petitioner were very good and even outstanding.
Otherwise also the said notice has been issued on 1481995, calling upon the petitioner to be relieved on 14111995 which as 4-1/2 months ahead of the date of superannuation i.e. 313.
1996.
This action on the part of the respondents cannot be said to have been passed in public interest.
4.
The petitioner alleges that he has unblemished record of service.
However, on the basis of certain insignificant incident relating to November, 1982 which has, nevertheless, been blown out of all proportions, the petitioner was served with a charge-sheet on 1351992.
In the month of July, 1992, the Haryana Government notified a policy decision for the grant of additional proficiency step-up increment in case of any category C&D employee may continue on a post without promotion for 8/18 years.
The petitioner has completed more than 18 years service on the cut off date, so he was entitled to the grant of additional proficiency step-up, but the same has been with- held by the respondents.
The petitioner submitted reply to the charge sheet and despite the matter being stale, he was in a position to satisfy the enquiry officer about the allegation, as a result of that the enquiry officer gave a favourable report exonerating the petitioner.
However, respondent No. 2 remained unconvinced with the report of the enquiry officer and he proceeded to award the punishment of reduction of pay of the petitioner to the lowest of the then prevalent grade of Rs. 1400-2600.
In this process pay of the petitioner, which had reached at Rs. 2820/- basic, was brought down to Rs. 1400/- i.e. less than a half.
This order of punishment was delivered to the petitioner on July 5, 1994.
The petitioner filed a statutory appeal with respondent No. 1 on 23.9.1994.
During the pendency of the appeal, the respondent No.2 went out of the way to order premature retirement of the petitioner and requisite three months notice was issued on 581995/7.8.1995, Annexure P-2.
In view of his impending superannuation, the petitioner, in the meanwhile, approached his Controlling Officer on 981995 seeking verification of his qualifying service and leave account.
The petitioner alleges that the impugned notice Annexure P-2 has not been passed in public interest and the guidelines given in 'KK Vaid's case have been ignored by the respondent No. 2 before issuance of notice Annexure P-2.
The petitioner alleges that the notice Annexure P-2 has been passed ignoring principles of public interest and before passing this order, his ACRs for the last 10 years have not been taken notice thereof and under these circumstances, the impugned notice cannot be said to have been passed in public interest.
The ground made for the issuance of the notice Annexure P-2 even cannot be taken into consideration because the statutory appeal filed by the petitioner was allowed by the Appellate Authority on 2381995 by which the impugned order was set aside.
The petitioner called upon his Controlling Authority to restore his pay as well as to grant additional proficiency increments vide representation Annexure P-3.
The petitioner also filed an appeal against his premature, compulsory retirement notice before respondent No. 1 vide Annexure P-4, but no action has been taken sofar.
With the above allegations, the petitioner prayed for the quashment of notice Annexure P-2 and has also prayed that respondents be directed to grant additional proficiency increments and other consequential and incidental reliefs.
5.
A joint written statement was filed on behalf of respondents No. 1 and 2 in which the allegations of the petitioner were denied and it was pleaded that it was in public interest to retain the petitioner into service after the age of 55 years.
The subjective satisfaction of the reviewing authority is not open to court's interference in absence of any mala fide.
Petitioner has not been able to show any perversity, arbitrariness or unreasonableness on the part of the respondents and for that reason, his writ is not maintainable.
It was also pleaded by the respondents that petitioner was charge-sheeted on 1351992 and the allegations against the petitioner were that he was guilty of serious misconduct as he failed to point out true facts of M/s. Mehra Beverages Private Limited, Village Agwanpur, Palwal and on account of the wrong recommendation made by the petitioner for the grant of provisional registration with ulterior motive, he rendered himself liable for disciplinary action.
Enquiry was conducted and the petitioner was found negligent in the performance of his official duties, as a result of that the punishment was awarded by the competent authority vide order dated 571994 conveyed to the petitioner on 291992 (Annexure R-1).
The action for the compulsory retirement of the petitioner has been taken in the light of the instructions dated 12121988 because the integrity of the petitioner was found to be doubtful.
The matter was duly considered by the Officers Level Committee in the meeting dated 1371995 and the committee recommended that the petitioner be retired from service in public interest after giving three months notice.
The petitioner was supposed to retire with effect from 15.11.1995, but in view of the orders dated 8111995 passed by this Court, the petitioner is still continuing in service.
The respondents admit that the Haryana Government took policy decision for the grant of additional increments to its employees belonging to category C&D who were in service, but without promotion for a period of 8/18 years provided the record of such employee is found satisfactory, but on account of the fact that the charge-sheet case was still in progress on 651993, the benefit of additional increment was not granted to the petitioner.
Enquiry Officer was appointed who held the petitioner guilty of negligence.
Procedure was adopted before awarding punishment to the petitioner.
Since the allegations were quite serious and the petitioner committed acts of omission and commission which tantamounted to adverse opinion about his integrity and reputation, as such the petitioner was found fit for premature retirement.
Respondent No. 2 had absolute power to retire the petitioner in public interest, but before doing that, case of the petitioner was also considered by the Officers Level Committee which was also of the view for the compulsory retirement of the petitioner.
Respondents admit that the appeal filed by the petitioner, no doubt, has been accepted and the impugned order has been set aside, but the orders passed by the Appellate Authority have been passed at the level of Joint Secretary to Government of Haryana, Industries Department whereas the Punishing Authority of the petitioner was Director of Industries, Haryana who holds a higher rank than that of the Joint Secretary.
In view of this technical lacuna, the case has been referred back to respondent No. 1 to review the setting aside orders and for decision of the case by the proper Appellate Authority.
It was also submitted that even after receipt of the setting aside orders dated 2381995 passed by the Joint Secretary, the matter was again referred back to the Chief Secretary through the Administrative Department, but the Chief Secretary has reiterated the earlier recommendations as conveyed by respondent No. 1 vide memo dated 17.11.1995 Annexure R-7.
Finally it was prayed by the respondents for dismissal of the writ petition as the Government has absolute powers to retire an employee after attaining the age of 55 years, in public interest.
6.
We have heard Shri KK Jagia, Advocate on behalf of the petitioner and Miss Ritu Bahri, AAG on behalf of the respondents and with their assistance have gone through the record of this case.
7.
Rule 326 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume I, Part I reads as follows :-  "Rule 326: Compulsory Retirement (a) Except as otherwise provided in other clauses of this rule, every Government employee shall retire from service on the afternoon of the last day of the month in which he attains the age of fifty-eight years.
He must not be retained in service after the age of compulsory retirement, except in exceptional circumstances with the sanction of the competent authority in public interest, which must be recorded in writing; x x x x (d) The appointing authority shall, if it is of the opinion that it is in the public interest so to do, have the absolute right to retire any Government employee, other than Class IV Government employee by giving him notice of not less than three months in writing or three months' pay and allowances in lieu of such notice :- (i) If he is in class I or class II service or post and had entered Government service, before attaining the age of thirty-five years, after he has attained the age of fifty years; and  (ii) (a) If he is in Class III service or post  or  (b) If he is Class I or Class II of post and entered Government service after attaining the age of thirty-five years; after he has attained the age of fifty-five years; 8.
A perusal of the above would show that an absolute right has been given to the appointing authority to retire a Government employee by giving him a notice of not less than three months in writing provided the action is taken in the public interest.
Though the order of compulsory retirement is not a punishment and the Government employee is entitled to draw all retirement benefits including pension, but the Government must exercise its powers only in the public interest to effectuate the efficiency of the service.
The idea behind this rule is to remove the dead-wood from the public administration so that the efficiency of the department be increased.
However, the underlying intention of the framers of this rule is that integrity in the public service must be maintained.
Also it is the object of the law that while exercising the powers of compulsory retirement, it must not be with an object to haunt a public servant.
Rather an action should be taken as a check and reasonable measure to ensure efficiency of service and free of corruption and incompetence.
The case in hand will be examined in the light of above principles.
9.
Though the impugned notice Annexure P-2 prima-facie alleged that it has been passed in public interest, but we are of the considered view that this action on the part of the respondents cannot be endorsed as it does not satisfy the test of judicial scrutiny.
It is the specific case of the petitioner that his service record was good/outstanding.
From the written statement, it is not clear that before passing the impugned order Annexure P- 2, the entire service record of the petitioner, especially that of 10 years prior to the issuance of the notice was taken into consideration or not.
Before passing the orders like Annexure P-2, It was obligatory on the part of the State Government to examine if there was sufficient evidence to take punitive disciplinary action of compulsory retirement from service and whether the conduct and reputation of the employee was such that his continuance in service would be a menace in public service and injurious to public interest.
Under the garb of public interest, the fate of an employee cannot be jeopardised.
Only allegation against the petitioner for taking action was an incident of inaction or omission or commission of the year 1982 and it is the common case of the parties that the charge-sheet was issued on 1351992 after a lapse of 10 years.
On a stale charge and allegation, it was not proper on the part of the authorities to make out a case of compulsory retirement.
Even if the charge is read in extenso and is taken on its face value, it will be difficult for us to hold that the petitioner was guilty of doubtful integrity.
At the most, it can be said an act of negligence when the petitioner did not take full care in the discharge of his duty to point out true facts on M/s Mehra Beverages Pvt. Ltd., Village Agwanpur, Palwal.
Negligence of duty, in some cases, may lead to an inference that a particular employee has done that act or omission for ulterior motive rendering himself liable for disciplinary action, but it would not be safe to conclude always that every act or omission has been committed for ulterior motive drawing inference of doubtful integrity.
The official action without departmental enquiry after lapse of 10 years, prima-facie cannot be said to have been taken according to the principles of natural justice.
Otherwise also, the gravamen of the charge through the departmental enquiry has been set aside by the Appellate Authority.
In other words, the allegations remained unproved on the record.
No doubt the respondents have decided to refer back the case to the Chief Secretary for reviewing the decision on the alleged plea that the appellate order has not been passed by a competent authority, yet it cannot be said that petitioner was at fault at any time when the appellant decision was allegedly given by an authority which was not competent to pass that order.
Nevertheless, as the position stands today, is that the orders passed by the punishing authority do not stand in the eyes of law any more.
10.
Learned AAG submitted that it is the subjective satisfaction of the punishing authority as to whether a particular employee should be retired from service or not and once that subjective satisfaction has been exercised, it should not be reviewed by the courts in the absence of any mala fide.
According to the counsel, there was sufficient material before the Government for arriving at the subjective satisfaction when the decision was taken for the compulsory retirement of the petitioner.
We are not in a position to concur with the argument raised by the Assistant Advocate General because the action of the respondent-authorities in issuing Annexure P-2 was an arbitrary action and it was unreasonable and, therefore, the Courts had the power to look into those factors leading to the issuance of Annexure P-2.
Stale incident of 1982 has been taken into consideration in the year of 1992.
With the lapse of the period, the alleged fault of the petitioner has lost its sting and the Government was not justified in taking into consideration that old incident of 1982 in the year 1992.
It has been held in 1995(1) Recent Services Judgments 18, Ramachandra Raju v. State of Orissa as follows:-  " The officer would live by reputation built around him.
In an appropriate case, there may not be sufficient evidence to take punitive disciplinary action of removal from service.
But his conduct and reputation is such that his continuance in service would be a menace in public service and injurious to public interest.
The entire service record or character rolls or confidential reports maintained would furnish the back drop material for consideration by the Government or the Review Committee or the appropriate authority.
On consideration of the totality of the facts and circumstances alone, the Government should form the opinion that the Government officer needs to be compulsorily retired from service.
Therefore, the entire service record more particularly the latest, would form the foundation for the opinion and furnish the base to exercise the power under the relevant rule to compulsorily retire a government officer.
When an officer reaching the age of compulsory retirement, as was pointed out by this Court, he could neither seek alternative appointment nor meet the family burdens with the pension or other benefits he gets and thereby he would be subjected to great hardship and family would be greatly affected.
Therefore, before exercising the power, the competent appropriate authority must weigh pros and cons and balance the public interest as against the individual interest.
On total evaluation of the entire record of service if the Government or the Governmental authority forms the opinion that in the public interest the officer needs to be retired compulsorily, the court may not interfere with the exercise of such bona fide exercise of power but the court has power and duty to exercise the power of judicial review not as a court of appeal but in its exercise of judicial review to consider whether the power has been properly exercised or is arbitrary or vitiated either by mala fide or actuated by extraneous consideration or arbitrary in retiring the Government officer compulsorily from service."
11.
In the present case, before exercising the power, the appropriate authority did not take into consideration the pros and cons of the entire service record of the petitioner before forming the opinion regarding retirement of the petitioner in public interest.
We have no hesitation in holding that the action on the part of the respondents in issuing notice Annexure P-2 was not a bona fide exercise.
Rather the Annexure P-2 cannot stand in exercise of our powers of judicial review and is liable to be quashed.
12.
In AIR 1987 Supreme Court 948 Brij Mohan Singh Chopra v. State of Punjab, it was held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India that object of compulsory retirement is to weed out the inefficient, corrupt, dishonest or dead-wood from the Government service.
However, the power of the Government is subject to rules or constitutional limitations.
It has been further laid down in this authority that in relation to compulsory retirement, the public interest means retention or honest and efficient employees and weeding out of inefficient and dishonest.
Also a guideline has been laid down that record of last ten years of service should be seen by the authority.
In the present case, it has not been alleged by the respondents that, but for the old incident of 1982, which too remained unproved, there was any other material before the authorities before issuance of the notice Annexure P-2.
In 1993(4) SLR-1, notice of compulsory retirement was quashed when the court found that employee had eight good reports during the last ten years of service and there was no report of integrity doubtful to his credit.
On the present case also, it has not been established prima-facie that the petitioner was a dead- wood or that his compulsory retirement was in public interest.
13.
Resultantly, we allow this writ petition and quash the impugned notice Annexure P-2 relating to the compulsory retirement of the petitioner.
For all intents and purposes, the petitioner would be deemed to be in service upto 313.1996 when he was to retire on attaining the age of superannuation i.e. 58 years.
We further direct the respondents to restore full pay of the petitioner consequent upon the passing of favourable appellate order and to grant additional proficiency increments which were due to the petitioner, as prayed for, No order as to costs.