RC Gandhi, J - The petitioner was convicted by the Special Judge, Anti- Corruption, Jammu under Section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 2006 and sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for six years and fine of Rs. 30,000/-.
As a consequence of his conviction, the respondents by impugned order No. 472-F of 1983 dated 31121983 dismissed the petitioner from service with effect from 31121983.
The petitioner has challenged the dismissal order on the ground that he has challenged the conviction and sentence recorded by the trial Court and his criminal appeal is pending before the Appellate Court.
2.
The petitioner averred in the petition that while the appeal is still sub judice and the conviction recorded has not obtained its finality, the order impugned is violative of Article 311 of the Constitution of India and the petition is entitled to the benefits of service including subsistence allowance, which the petitioner was receiving from the respondents during trial.
The petitioner has submitted that he has been dismissed from service without holding any enquiry.
3.
The respondents have filed objections controverting the legal grounds.
4.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
5.
It is an admitted fact that the petitioner has been convicted and sentenced by the criminal Court and appeal of the petitioner is sub judice.
6.
The contention of the petitioner is that the conviction recorded by the criminal Court has obtained its finality and the appellate Court has suspended the sentence also, the respondents have illegally issued the order of dismissal.
The contention of the petitioner appears to be unjustified and unfounded.
The petitioner has been dismissed from service as a consequence of his conviction in a criminal charge.
The pendency of the appeal or suspension of the sentence or grant of bail by the appellate Court does not render the order of conviction ineffective.
7.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has cited in support of his contention, AIR 1959 Punjab 401: AIR 1961 page 486 and AIR 1965 Punjab 153.
The judgments cited by the learned counsel do not support the case of the petitioner and deal with the different situation.
The proposition dealt with by the Court in these judgments is that the conviction was recorded by the trial Court and based upon that conviction, an employee was dismissed from service.
The appellate Court set aside the order of conviction and sentence.
The order of dismissal was held to be illegal on the ground that the order of conviction passed by the trial Court has not got its finality and the employee was held entitled to all the service benefits.
This proposition of law is still available to the petitioner provided the petitioner succeeds in appeal.
8.
The next contention of the petitioner is that he could not have been dismissed from service without any enquiry and the shelter of Article 311 of the Constitution of India should have been extended to the petitioner also by the respondents.
This contention of the petitioner also is untenable.
Proviso (a) to Article 311 refers to conviction resulting on criminal charge on the ground of the conduct of the person convicted.
The trial Court has gone into the conduct of the petitioner and after full trial, has recorded conviction having jurisdiction to record such conviction as conviction by a Criminal Court itself can be taken as basis for the punishment provided under Clause (2) of the Article 311 of the Constitution of India without any further enquiry.
The order of the respondent does not suffer on the ground that the respondent has not held any enquiry into the conduct of the petitioner.
The conviction recorded by the criminal Court commences to operate the moment it is recorded and subsists till it is set aside by the appellate Court or a court of revision.
What is contemplated in proviso (a) to Article 311(2) is subsisting conviction or conviction in operation in an appeal against the conviction, the conviction is not suspended, it is only the sentence or order in consequence of such conviction is suspended.
During the pendency of the appeal, the conviction is still alive and until such conviction is set aside, it remains effective and can be made the basis of dismissal or removal of public servant from the service.
9.
The contention of the petitioner has no force and fails.
10.
For the foregoing reasons, the writ petition is dismissed.
No order as to costs.