BA Khan, J - When does a candidate acquire an academic certification ?
Is it on the date when the results of the relevant examination are declared or when the result is communicated to him ?
What if his result is withheld for some technical reason on the date of general declaration and is communicated to him later ?
Should he be rendered ineligible for consideration of employment if such result is not intimated to him before the last date of receipt of applications for a post but well before the interview ?
All those interesting questions arise in this appeal and beg an authoritative pronouncement.
2.
Appellant applied for the post of Asstt.
Engineer (Elect) in the Power Development Department (PDD) in response to the Public Service Commission (PSC) notifications Nos. 13/87 and 2/88.
The minimum qualification prescribed was a bachelor's degree in electrical engineering or AMIE (Sections A & B) India Electrical Engg.
and the last date of receipt of the applications was 10th March, 1988.
3.
Appellant, in this application, claimed that he had qualified his bachelor's degree in engineering and obtained 5569/8000 marks.
His application form was entertained and he was eventually invited for interview on 16.4.1992.
He was asked to bring the original testimonials and documents along and was also informed that his participation in the interview was provisional subject "to production of BE (Electronics) Degree/Marks certificate".
He asserts that he submitted the requisite certificates and documents on the date of interview.
He was consequently interviewed and ultimately was placed at Serial No. 8 of the select list in order of merit.
His travails started when his result of selection was withheld "for want of declaration of BE (Electronics) result".
He tried to come over the hitch by submitting a certificate from the Asstt.
Controller of Examinations, Kashmir University certifying that he had appeared in the BE examination in August, 1987 under Roll.
No. 5874 which he had passed obtaining 5569/8000 marks but his result was withheld in the general result notification No. 1-BEF/87 dated 23101987 because of "incomplete registration" and that he should be deemed to have passed the examination on 23101987.
This did not convince the Commission and its Secretary sought further clarification vide letter dated 22.12.93 and the Controller of Examination vide his communication dated 121994 respondent as under :  "The result of the candidate was kept withheld due to incomplete registration which was declared vide notification dated 3131988.
Regarding the date of passing of the examination, please go through the qualification certificate which stands already issued to the candidate and which speaks for itself."
The degree certificate issued by the University in June, 1989, which was submitted by him to the Commission at the time of interview, also certified as under :  "Certified that Mir Farhat Rasool son of Ghulam Rasool Mir of the Regional Engineering College, Srinagar, has been admitted to the degree of BACHELOR OF ENGINEERING in the discipline of Electronics and Communication Engineering in the year 1987 (August) and that he was placed in the First Division."
4.
This also did not move the Commission with the result that the appellant was deprived of his appointment to the post of Asstt.
Engineer (AE) despite his superior merit.
He consequently filed SSWP No. 1627/94 in Srinagar wing seeking a mandamus to the Commission to declare and forward his result to the Government and a further direction to the Government to appoint him to the post of Asstt.
Engineer (Elect) and to treat him duly appointed on the date other selected candidates figuring in the select list dated 1101993, were so appointed and for other consequential service benefits.
His case before the writ court was that he was admittedly eligible on the last date of receipt of applications as he had obtained the BE degree by that date, withholding of his result on technical grounds notwithstanding and that this selection result could not be withheld on untenable grounds and arbitrarily to deprive him of his appointment.
It was alternatively contended by him that since the Commission had treated his case under Rule 37 of the J&K Public Service (Conduct of Business) Rules, it was not open to the Commission not to go back on it and to question his eligibility for the post.
5.
This writ petition was resisted by the respondent-Commission primarily on the plea that the appellant had misled it to believe that he had qualified his BE (Electronics) and had obtained 5608 marks before receipt of applications i.e. 1031988.
The withholding of his selection result was justified on the ground that the result of the BE examination was communicated to him admittedly after the last date of receipt of application and on 3131988.
In short, the stand taken was that he was ineligible for the post of AE as on the last date of receipt of applications and thus could not be recommended for appointment despite his merit.
Reliance was placed in support on AIR 1989 SC 134, AIR 1980 SC 1230 and (1984)3 SLR 90.
6.
Appellant's writ petition was dismissed vide judgment dated 13121994 solely on the ground that he was guilty of suppression of material facts and furnishing of false information to the Commission which merited rejection of his application in terms of the conditions contained in the advertisement notification.
While doing so, the learned Single Judge held that he had falsely declared himself qualified and had also indicated the marks wrongly and thus his candidature was liable to be rejected.
7.
Appellant's case before us is that the learned Single Judge had fallen in grave error by dismissing his writ petition on a non-issue.
It is contended that the writ court had not dealt with the crucial issues raised and had proceeded to reject the case on a premise which is otherwise belied by the record.
8.
Mr. Jan, learned counsel for the appellant urged that the appellant had admittedly qualified his BE degree on the last date of receipt of application i.e., 1031988 and this stood proved by all the circumstances and documents on record.
He could not, therefore, be accused of furnishing any false information to the Commission.
It is a different matter, however, that his result was withheld on technical grounds in the general result notification dated 23101987 for which he could neither be blamed nor penalised.
Nor could it be deduced from this that he had failed in the BE examination on the date general result notification was issued i.e., 23101987.
He further contended that once the University authorities, through their certificate and communications had impressed upon the respondent-Commission that the date of the appellant's qualification should be taken to be the date of general notification dated 23101987 or alternatively the date given in the degree certificate i.e., August, 1987 it was not for the Commission to disbelieve all this and to arbitrarily withhold result of the appellant.
9.
Mr. Jan alternatively submitted that even if it be assumed that the date of the degree is the date when the result was communicated to the appellant on 3131988, still his case was covered by rule 37 of the Rules (supra) and was to be treated eligible on the date of interview held more than four years later.
He sought support from AIR 1980 SC 1230 (Charles K Skaria v. C Mathew) to point out that possession of a qualification was different than its proof.
10.
Mr. Raina, learned counsel for the respondent-Commission vainly tried to support the judgment impugned on the ground that the appellant was guilty of furnishing false information in his application form.
He also referred to a number of judgments of this Court dealing with the issue of eligibility of candidates related to their possession of the prescribed qualifications and prayed that these be taken into consideration.
He cited in this regard three Division Bench judgments of this Court in Naresh Singh v. State and others (AIR 1994 J&K 42), Competent Authority v. Mahesh Kumar, (1994 KLJ 80) and Parveen Shanker Dass v. Competent Authority besides Single Bench judgments in Basharat Iqbal v. J&K Public Service Commission (W.P. 205/93) decided on 2741994 and Dimpy Raina v. State and others (WP 209/93) decided on 31111993.
11.
Before adverting to the merits, a word about the judgments (supra) which according to Mr. Raina, protray a confusing picture on the point in issue.
We have gone through these judgments and we find no confusion therein on the relevant issues involved.
Fortunately, three of these are authored by one of us (Khan, J.) and we find ourselves advantageously placed to appreciate their true tenor and import and to clear the cobwebs, if any.
12.
It must be pointed out at the very outset that these judgments enunciate propositions in the context of their own facts and circumstances and do not lay down any generalised proposition of law.
13.
For instance, the issue in Naresh Singh's case was as to whether or not the application form of a candidate for BE course, laying claim to a reserved category should be accompanied by the requisite certificate on the last date of receipt of application in terms of notification dated 2261992 and the Court on interpreting the terms and conditions laid down in the notification took the view that the candidate was required to attach the requisite certificate alongwith the application form on the last date of receipt of applications to save his candidature.
In Mahesh Kumar's case a Division Bench of this Court again dealt with different point viz: whether the candidate laying claim to the reserved category should be denied consideration where the statutory authority had failed to grant a reserved category certificate to such a candidate within the prescribed statutory time.
And in Parveen Shanker's case, a Division Bench of this Court placing reliance on the relevant rules, held that a candidate for selection to the MD/MS course should be eligible on the date of submitting his application form.
Similarly, in Basharat Iqbal's case and Dimpy Raina's case one of us (Khan J) analysed the proposition enunciated by the Supreme Court in Ashok Kumar's case (Civil Appeal No. 5407) and held that the Apex Court had not laid down any general proposition that a candidate could be treated eligible even if he had qualified upto the date of interview ignoring the terms and conditions of the notification inviting application and the last date prescribed for satisfying the eligibility therein.
In these judgments it was made clear that grant or refusal of relief in such cases depended upon the facts and circumstances of the case.
14.
All this goes to show that these judgments do not suffer from any confusion or clash as perceived by Mr. Raina.
These, on the contrary, proceed to decide matters in the backdrop of the peculiar facts and circumstances of each case.
Therefore, we feel no need to dilate any more on these judgments which are also not relevant on the issues raised in this appeal.
We accordingly proceed to deal with the matter on its merits and in light of the available precedent.
15.
All that falls to be considered in the present case is : Whether the appellant could be said to have acquired the degree before the last date of receipt of applications i.e., 1031988 or alternatively, whether he was eligible to be considered on the date of interview held on 17.4.1988 even when the result of BE examination of 1987 (August) was communicated to him on 3131988, about 20 days or so after the last date of receipt of applications ?
16.
The factual matrix is, by and large, admitted.
It is the common ground that the appellant took the BE examination in August 1987.
It is also borne by record that result of the examination was declared vide notification No. 1/87 dated 23101987 but the appellant's result was withheld "due to incomplete registration".
His result was eventually communicated to him on 3131988, 20 days or so after the last date of receipt of the applications.
The sequence of events surrounding the withholding of appellant's result is not clear but it is not anybody's case that he had failed in the examination or was so shown to have failed when the result of the examination was declared on 23101987.
The correspondence of the University authorities shows that his result was withheld for "incomplete registration" admittedly some technical snag unrelated to his success in the examination.
17.
The question that arises is: Whether he could be treated unqualified merely because his result could not be declared on the due date because of some technical deficiency ?
Let us first see what the Examination body has to say in the matter.
The Controller of Examination has gone on record to suggest that he should be treated as having qualified on the date general result notification was issued on 23101987, if not, the date on which he was admitted to the degree i.e., August 1987, as per his degree certificate.
That should have clinched the issue as there was nothing before the Commission to disbelieve or to question this stand and to complicate the issues unnecessarily.
But that was not to be and that is how we are called upon to examine the issue.
In our view, the appellant has done all that was within his power to take the examination and if his result could not be declared on the due date i.e., 23101987, because of some technical reasons, he could not be faulted or blamed for this or declared to have failed in the examination.
Nor could he be treated to have lost the degree and qualification on this date.
If anything, he had undoubtedly, qualified on the crucial date and the only hitch in his way that this fact of having qualified could not be communicated to him for some technical reasons.
By no rationale or logic could this circumstance be used to dispossess him of his degree.
Any contrary view would be illogical and lead to absurd results.
Cases are not inconceivable and instances are not wanting where the result of an examination is declared but the result of a candidate is withheld for some reason or omission.
Where it is withheld by omission or mistake or for want of completion of some requirement or formality, should a candidate be treated disqualified for this on the relevant date ?
The answer has to be straightaway in the negative and it would be wholly unjust to treat him so and to deprive him of his hard earned qualification for nothing.
The acquisition of a qualification or a degree is different from its communication or proof.
Its non-communication or for that matter lack of proof on a particular date cannot negate it so long as it is not proved that he had failed and stood disqualified.
As observed by the Apex Court in Charles K Skaria's case (supra), a distinction is required to be drawn between the possession of a qualification and the proof of having acquired it.
What is essential, is the possession of a qualification before the given date which may be proved even subsequently.
It would be advantageous to refer to the principles enunciated in this regard:  "....Academic excellence, through a diploma cannot be denuded because proof is produced only later, yet before the date of actual selection ..... .... Mode of proof is geared to the goal of qualification in question ...What is essential is the possession of a diploma before the given date, what is ancillary is the safe mode of proof of qualification.
To confuse between the fact and its proof is blurred perspicacity ...." The Court further observed : "......So, the short question is when can a candidate claim to have got a diploma ?
When he has done all that he has to do and the result of it is officially made known by the concerned authority.
An examinee for a degree or diploma must complete his examination - written, oral or practical - before he can tell the selection committee or the court that he has done his part.
Even this is not enough.
If all goes well after that, he cannot be credited with the title to the degree if the results are announced only after the last date for applications but before selection.
The second condition precedent must also be fulfilled, viz., the official communication of the result before the selection and its being brought to the ken of the committee in an authentic manner.
May be, the examination is cancelled or the marks of the candidates are withheld.
He acquires the degree or diploma only when the results are officially made known.
Until then this qualification is inchoate.
But once these events happen his qualification can be taken into account in evaluation of equal opportunity provided the selection committee has the result before it at the time of - not after - the selection is over ...." The appellant's case stands at a higher pedestal.
His qualification had surely come into being on 23.10.1988 when the result of the BE examination was declared by the University though it was not communicated to him.
Thus, he should be deemed to have acquired the degree on this date which fell within the prescribed date of receipt of the application.
On this premise he was eligible to be considered and could not have been held in his tracks on a flimsy and untenable ground.
18.
Looking at the matter from the other angle, it cannot be ignored that the respondent-Commission had dealt with the appellant's case under rule 37 of the Rules which though repealed now, was in existence at the relevant time.
The relevant rule is reproduced and reads thus:  "Applications of candidates who have appeared in the examination, the passing of which may make them eligible to appear in an interview for recruitment to a post to be made otherwise than by a competitive examination, but results whereof have not been declared upto the date of the making of the application, may be entertained provisionally but no such candidate shall be permitted to take the interview if he is declared as having failed in the examination or if the results are not available on the date the viva voce test is held.
The advertisement notification by the Commission shall carry a note to this effect invariably.
This shall not apply to application for sitting in a competitive examination in which case the applicants shall have to be in possession of the prescribed qualification on the date of making the application."
This provision makes an exception providing an added facility to such candidates for recruitment whose results of the qualifying examination are awaited on the date of their application.
It empowers the Commission to entertain their applications provisionally and excludes those from the interview who might have failed or whose results were unavailable on the date of interview.
This concession is not, however, available to candidates for a competitive examination.
Where the Commission resorts to this Rule and entertains the application of a candidate pending the declaration of his result in the qualifying examination and also interviews him, it cannot subsequently turn round and withhold his selection result on the ground that his result was declared after the last date of receipt of applications.
This is not the case where the appellant's result was not available on or before the interview.
The only difficulty was that it had not been communicated to him before the last date fixed for receipt of applications.
But for this, he had answered all conditions of the prescribed eligibility in all respects years before he was interviewed.
Therefore, nothing stood in his way and on the strength of the Apex Court judgment in Ashok Kumar's case, he was eligible to be considered on the date of interview and entitled to be selected on the basis of his performance and suitability.
Moreover, once the Commission had processed his case and dealt with it in exercise of power under rule 37, it was bound by its action and could not be allowed to go back on it.
It follows as a necessary corollary that there was nothing thereafter on the basis of which the Commission could make a volte face and deny him the selection on flimsy ground of "trying to know the date of declaration of his result" which was already known to it on the date of interview, if not earlier.
19.
In this view of the matter we feel no difficulty to hold that a candidate, if he passes, acquires an academic qualification on the date the result of the relevant examination is declared notwithstanding that his result was withheld on account of some technical deficiency or because of some omission or mistake and was not communicated to him before the date prescribed for receipt of applications for selection to fill up a post.
Such a candidate, if he had applied within time explaining the circumstances, should be deemed eligible for consideration and entitled to selection subject to his overall performance and suitability and in the event his result and the proof of prescribed qualification is available before or on the date of interview.
He cannot be deprived of the opportunity of employment merely because the proof of his qualification was unavailable on the deadline fixed.
This is in tune with principle enunciated by the Supreme Court in Ashok Kumar's case and the spirit of Rule 37.
20.
Viewed thus, we are convinced that the appellant's result of selection was withheld by the Commission on untenable and unsustainable grounds illegally and arbitrarily and that he was wrongly (sic) whatsoever in violation of his rights guaranteed to him under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
He stands discriminated against and requires to be treated fairly and equally with those who were similarly situated with him in the select list prepared by the Commission.
21.
In light of the foregoing discussion, we also notice that the learned Single Judge had failed to come to grips with the crucial issues raised by the appellant in his writ petition and had dismissed it on the basis of a non-issue.
In our opinion, there was no occasion to hold him guilty of furnishing false information or suppressing the material facts when the whole record before the Commission as also before the writ court, unmistakably proved his bona fides and the genuineness of his stand.
All in all, his case had been misappreciated throughout.
22.
For the reasons given, we allow this appeal and set aside the impugned judgment.
Considering that the parties' case was considered in great detail and accorded appreciation threadbare, it would serve no purpose to direct admission of the appellant's writ petition and to prolong the appellant's agony.
We consequently allow his writ petition on the strength of given reasoning and resultantly command the Public Service Commission by a writ of mandamus to declare the appellant's result of selection and forward it to the respondent-State forthwith.
We also direct the Government and its functionaries to appoint him to the post of Asstt.
Engineer (Elect.)
on the basis of the recommendation of the Commission and to treat him having been appointed from the date other candidates figuring in the select list of the Commission were so appointed and to give him all consequential service benefits.