NK Kapoor, J - Petitioner seeks issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari/mandamus or any other appropriate writ, order or direction directing respondent Nos. 1 to 3 to grant admission to Ashish Mittal, son of the petitioner in any of the Engineering Colleges against the non-payment seat as reserved for children/grand children of Freedom Fighters.
2.
In the first instance the petitioner sought issuance of a writ of mandamus directing respondent No. 1 to issue him a Freedom Fighter certificate to substantiate the claim made by his son Ashish Mittal for a non-payment reserved seat being a grand son of a Freedom Fighter in one of the Engineering Colleges.
As per averments made in the writ petition, it was stated that Ashish Mittal is grand son of late Shri Ram Partap, who in fact had been drawing Freedom Fighter pension from the Government Treasury.
This Freedom Fighter pension was sanctioned by the Government of India vide order dated 3081974.
Prayer was also made that respondents be directed to allow the petitioner's son to appear in the interview for the said admission on 2691995, subject to the decision of the writ petition.
3.
This writ petition came up for consideration on 2291995 and notice of motion was issued to the respondents.
A further direction was given for interviewing the petitioner's son on 2691995 or on any other date.
Pursuance to the notice of the Court, written statement has been filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 2 and 3.
The claim of the petitioner for consideration in respect of reserved seat for the children of Freedom Fighter was resisted on the ground that the petitioner has failed to place on record the necessary documents/certificates in support of his contention that he is entitled to be considered under this reserved category.
However, it was stated that the name of the petitioner's son shall be considered amongst general category candidates.
4.
Respondent No. 1 filed a short written statement in the form of an affidavit.
According to Shri PK Sharma, deponent, Shri Pawan Kumar Gupta son of Shri Ram Partap Gupta vide his application dated 491995 requested the Haryana Government to issue him a Freedom Fighter certificate in favour of late Ram Partap, Freedom Fighter of Karnal.
According to the deponent neither the petitioner nor his son applied for this certificate.
Since the application of Shri Pawan Kumar Gupta was not accompanied by requisite original/authenticated documents, so, same was rejected on 1191995.
It is on 1591995 that Ashish Mittal, grand son of Shri Ram Partap alongwith his father Hukam Chand filed another application seeking issuance of a Freedom Fighter certificate in the name of late Ram Partap.
According to the deponent they were asked to submit original/authenticated documents to prove that Ram Partap was getting Freedom Fighter pension from the Government of India and that he was a bona fide resident of Haryana State.
On 17101995 petitioner submitted attested/photocopies of the required documents and so, necessary certificate was issued in the name of Late Ram Partap on 18101995.
According to the deponent delay in issuance of certificate has occurred on account of petitioner's not filing the required documents before such a certificate could be issued.
5.
The petition was admitted on 21111995.
It was also ordered that the same be heard at No. 1 on 24111995.
During hearing, request was made to implead the pesons who have been admitted in the category of children/grand children of Freedom Fighters, though lower in merit to the petitioner.
The prayer was not opposed and so the petitioner was permitted to file an amended writ petition.
6.
Vide amended writ petition, petitioner seeks issuance of an appropriate writ in the nature of certiorari/mandamus directing respondent Nos. 1 to 3 to grant admission to Ashish Mittal, son of the petitioner in any one of the Engineering Colleges against a non-payment seat reserved for children/grand children of Freedom Fighters since persons lower in merit i.e. respondent No. 5 to 10 have already been granted admission.
7.
Respondent No. 10 alone has chosen to file reply to the amended writ petition.
By way of preliminary objection it has been stated that the petitioner has not approached the Court with clean hands and is guilty of concealing the material facts from the Court.
In fact petitioner's son Ashish Mittal was offered admission by the respondent-College authorities on his production of relevant certificates on 19101995.
Since certificates were not produced, so the admission was declined.
The two seats out of the quota for children of Freedom Fighters which were available on 19101995 have already been filled i.e. one seat has been allotted to one of the claimants in this category i.e. children/grand children of Freedom Fighters, the other seat has been converted in the quota of non-resident Indians and the admission has already been allowed against this seat also.
On merit, it has been stated that since Ashish Mittal's application was not accompanied with the requisite certificates entitling him to claim admission in respect of the reserved seat his claim was rightly declined.
Since the answering respondent fulfil the requisite qualifications he had been rightly granted admission and is attending the classes.
Since the admission has been granted by a validly constituted Interviewing/Screening Committee the same cannot be undone at this stage when the study for the first semester is almost over and the examinations are likely to commence.
Thus, it was prayed that the petition be dismissed.
8.
State counsel was directed to bring the original record pertaining to the applications dated 491995 and 1591995 submitted on behalf of Ashish Mittal to procure the requisite certificate that his grand father was a Freedom Fighter vide order dated 521996.
On the next date of hearing learned Deputy Advocate General, Haryana, instead of producing the original record summoned made a prayer that he be supplied the copy of the amended writ petition so that reply be filed by the respondent-State.
On the next date of hearing no reply was filed to the amended writ petition by the State of Haryana.
So, another opportunity was granted.
Respondent-State was also directed to produce the original record relating to the petitioner's applications for grant of necessary certificate i.e. his grand father was a Freedom Fighter.
The case remained on the regular list and in fact was adjourned on one or two occasions as neither the counsel for the State came present nor original record pertaining to the applications dated 491995 and 1591995 submitted on behalf of Ashish Mittal, as earlier directed by the Court, was produced by any authorised person on behalf of the department.
Ultimately, it was thought proper to hear the counsel present and decide this matter without any further delay.
9.
The learned counsel for the petitioner at the outset submitted that since the private respondents somehow have been admitted to the course/courses and have also attended classes during these months; petitioner would feel satisfied even if a direction is issued to the respondents to accommodate him in this reserved category i.e. non-payment seat of the category of children/grand-children of Freedom Fighters in the next commencing session for admission to the various Engineering Colleges.
According to the counsel, the petitioner's son was in fact not only entitled to be considered being a grand son of Freedom Fighter but ought to have been given admission to a non-payment seat as per merit list.
Since private-respondents have been admitted (though erroneously) and have attended classes for few months; now it would be indeed just and proper if suitable direction is issued that one seat shall be reserved for the petitioner's son in any of the Engineering Colleges in any engineering course in the next commencing session.
10.
Petitioner is in fact aggrieved by callous and indifferent attitude of respondent No. 1 for two reasons, firstly, the application for grant of certificate that Shri Ram Partap son of Shri Nar Singh Dass was a Freedom Fighter was rejected stating it to be incomplete and, secondly, giving the necessary certificate after the due date.
According to the petitioner Shri Ram Partap, his father, was a Freedom Fighter and in fact was drawing pension from Karnal Treasury.
Shri Ram Partap was awarded pension by Government of India, Ministry of Home Affairs, on 3081974.
So, during all these years he had been drawing pension from the Government Treasury at Karnal yet for no reasons application filed to support the claim of Ashish Mittal that he is the grand- son of Ram Partap, a Freedom Fighter, was somehow declined for no good reason.
Thus, petitioner's son was deprived of his rightful claim on account of indifferent attitude of respondent No. 1.
However, according to the respondent-State the application lacked necessary particulars and so the respondent No. 1 had no choice but to decline the same.
It is precisely with a view to verify the rival contentions raised by the parties as to whether the applications dated 491995 and 1591995 filed for and on behalf of Ashish Mittal for the necessary certificate in fact was complete in all particulars or not, that respondent No. 1 was directed to bring the original record for perusal.
As noticed in the earlier part of the judgment, original record has not been produced and even the State Counsel has failed to put in appearance.
This being so, it would be reasonable to infer that the averments made by the petitioner that requisite application was accompanied with all necessary particulars and was unjustly declined, thus depriving Ashish Mittal- petitioner's son of his just claim to be considered amongst the category of children/grand children of Freedom Fighters are correct.
Thus, it can be taken that the claim laid by Shri Ashish Mittal for this reserved seat was in fact in order.
As per the merit list, Annexure P-8, Ashish Mittal secured 82 marks and ranked at 4518 in the aforesaid merit list whereas Ms. Sulakihna and Mr. Amit Ahlawat shown at serial Nos. 13 and 14 in Annexure P-8 secured 81 marks and were at serial Nos. 4753 and 4893 respectively.
The aforesaid two persons though lower in merit have, however, been granted admission in the reserved category of children/grand-children of Freedom Fighters.
The two reserved seats have been filled up by the University as the direction of this Court was only to interview Ashish Mittal.
This way, the authorities merely complied with the form of the order and ignored its essence.
Had the authorities examined the matter with some depth or taken steps to seek clarification from this Court the matter would not have reached this stage.
In any case, since this Court was seized of the matter, it was incumbent upon the respondents to seek clarification if need be before filling up the two reserved seats (children/grand-children of Freedom Fighters).
Even if it be taken that respondents have not violated the direction of this Court yet as per facts of this case one can infer that the seats have been filled up solely with a view to frustrate the relief which the Court might ultimately had decided to grant.
To this extent neither the approach of respondent No. 1 in withholding the original documents not the conduct of respondent No. 2 in filling up the seats without making an attempt to get clarification from the Court can be termed to be honest.
In fact, such a conduct is depreciable.
For no justifiable reason a legitimate claim raised by the son of the petitioner has in the first instance been scuttled and finally declined causing mental anguish as well as a year of studies.
Authorities are expected to act with some amount of consideration while examining these cases and are not expected to decline or refuse to consider merely on account of some miner lapse here or there.
The acts of the authorities have in fact led to impasse.
Admission to the course was closed sometime in October, 1995.
Even the classes had commenced and as stated by respondent Nos. 2 and 3 even the first semester has finished.
This being so, no useful purpose would be served by quashing the admission and ordering for a fresh determination and it is precisely for this reason a lesser relief is being granted to the petitioner i.e. that he be granted admission in any one of the streams of Engineering i.e. Civil, Mechanical, Electronics etc., in any one of the Colleges in the next session and if need be an additional seat be created in this category.
It is, however, made clear that option to offer a seat in any one of the various Engineering Courses and the College/Colleges will vest with respondent authorities and the petitioner shall not be entitled to make grievance of the same.
Writ petition stands disposed of.