THB Chalapathi, J - This Writ Petition has been filed by the petitioner for quashing the award of the Labour Court dated December 13, 1993.
2.
Respondent No. 2 was appointed as a Packer for a period of eighty-nine days with effect from October 21, 1986.
After the expiry of the period of eighty nine days and after notional break, respondent No. 2 was again appointed as such for eighty-nine days on February 10, 1987.
After completion of that period, again he was appointed as such for a period of twenty-nine days.
Further appointment was given to him for another period of twenty-nine days.
His services were terminated with effect from August 3, 1987.
Thereafter, respondent No. 2 raised an industrial dispute which was referred to the Labour Court for adjudication.
The Labour Court on the basis of the material on record came to the conclusion that respondent No. 2 continuously worked for a period of two hundred and forty days and, therefore, he is entitled to reinstatement in his job with continuity of service and full back wages.
3.
Aggrieved by the said award, the petitioner has preferred the above writ petition.
4.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that respondent No. 2 actually worked for a period of one hundred and sixty nine days only.
Therefore, he has not completed two hundred and forty days.
In para 3 of the writ petition, the number of days respondent No. 2 worked in each month have been given.
But this statement in para 3 is contrary to the orders of appointment.
There is no dispute that on October 21, 1986, respondent No. 2 was originally appointed for a period of eighty-nine days.
Again by an order dated February 10, 1987, respondent No. 2 was appointed for a period of eighty-nine days.
On April 30, 1987, respondent No. 2 was again appointed for a period of twenty-nine days with effect from May 9, 1987.
Thus, respondent No. 2 worked for eighty nine days from October 21, 1986, and again for eighty-nine days from February 10, 1987, and twenty-nine days from May 9, 1987.
Thus, respondent No. 2 worked for a period of two hundred and seven days under the orders dated December 16, 1986, February 10, 1987, April 30, 1987 and June 24, 1987, (Order dated December 16, 1986, was issued after respondent No. 2 started working with effect from October 21, 1986).
That order clearly shows that respondent No. 2 was appointed as a Packer for a period of eighty- nine days with effect from October 21, 1986.
The period of twenty-nine days mentioned in the order dated May 9, 1987, comes to an end by June 7, 1987.
In the petition, it is categorically stated that respondent No. 2 worked in the month of July, 1989, and for a period of one day in August, 1987.
Thus, the total working days come to two hundred and thirty nine days even according to the petitioner.
But according to the respondent, he worked upto August 3, 1987.
If that is so, the total number of working days comes to two hundred and forty one days.
Learned counsel for the petitioner argued that respondent No. 2 worked for a period of two hundred and thirty six days only, thereafter, he has not completed two hundred and forty days.
So, he is not entitled to the benefit of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act.
Learned counsel for the respondent has placed before me a memo issued by the Assistant Secretary (Publication) bearing No. 881/VB dated June 24, 1987, with regard to the subject, namely, regarding appointment of Nakul son of Shri Om Parkash (the petitioner herein).
In the said memo, it is categorically mentioned as follows:-  "You are hereby informed that the Secretary has granted the approval for appointment of Nakul son of Shri Om Parkash on the post of Packer, on daily wages.
Thereafter, you keep the worker on the job by giving break of one day and submit the joining report of the workman in the head office.
You should also keep in view and certify that the workman has not completed 240 days with you."
Thus, it is clear that the Assistant Secretary had given clear instructions to the Deputy Director not to allow the workman to complete two hundred and forty days and give him appointment with break of service.
This clearly amounts to unfair labour parctice which is not permissible under law.
In fact, according to respondent No. 2 he had worked throughout the month of July and three days in August, 1987.
If these days are also taken into account, then it would amount to responent No. 2's working for a period of two hundred and forty one days.
The Tribunal considered the meterial on record and came to the conclusion that respondent No. 2 actually worked for a period of two hundred and forty days, and thereafore, he is entitled to the benefit of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act.
The conttention of the learned counsel is that the Labour Court has taken into account the holidays during which respondent No. 2 has not worked.
But as observed by the Supreme Court in Workmen of American Express International Banking Corporation v. Management of American Express International Banking Corporation, A.I.R. 1986 SC 459 :-  "Sundays and other paid holidays should be taken into account for the purpose of reckoning the total number of days on which the workman could be said to have actually worked."
There is no evidence led in by the management either before the Labour Court or before this Court that the workman has not been paid his wages during the holidays and Sundays.
When the appointment was made for a period of eighty- nine days continuouly with effect from a particular day/date, it means that the workman will be paid the salary for the entire period of eighty-nine days including holidays.
The period of eighty-nine days will not be counted after excluding the holidays.
It will be counted including the Sundays and other holidays.
As observed already, there is no material either before the Labour Court or before me to show that the workman had not been paid any wages either on Sundays or on any other holidays.
Therefore, I do not find any illegality or error in the order of the Labour Court that the workman has worked for a period of two hundred and forty days and, therefore, he is entitled to be renistated in service with full back wages.
The learned counsel further argued that the Labour Court erred in awarding full back wages to the workman.
It is now settled law that it is for the management to plead/prove that the workman was gainfully employed during the period when he was out of service, There is neither any pleading nor proof on the part of the management on this issue.
Therefore, I am of the opinion that the Labour Court rightly awarded full back wages to respondent No. 2.
In the view I am taking, I do not find any ground warranting interference by this Court with the order of the Labour Court.
The result is that Writ Petition fails and is, therefore, dismissed.
No order as to costs.