NK Sodhi, J - Petitioner workman was in the regular employment of Municipal Committee, Fazilka (hereinafter called the employer) as an Electrician and he was removed from service by a resolution passed on 511983 after giving him one month's pay in lieu of notice.
This termination gave rise to an industrial dispute and the same was referred for adjudication to the Presiding Officer, Labour Court-respondent.
It is common case of the parties that the workman had also challenged the order terminating his services in appeal before the Deputy Commissioner, Ferozepur and the order was upheld.
Since the workman had filed an appeal and the order of termination had been upheld, the Labour Court held that reference under section 19(1)(c) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for short, the Act) was not maintainable.
It was further observed that the remedy under the Act and the one availed of by the workman were alternative and since he had chosen the remedy of appeal, he could not raise an industrial dispute under the Act.
Consequently, the reference was decided in favour of the employer and against the workman.
The dispute was not adjudicated on merits holding that the workman was not entitled to any relief.
It is this award that has been challenged by the workman in the present petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution  2.
I have heard counsel for the parties and am of the opinion that the impugned award of the Labour Court cannot be sustained.
It has been held by a Full Bench of this Court in The Ambala Central Co-operative Bank Limited, Ambala v. The State of Haryana and others, 1993(1) PLR 424 : 1993(2) SCT 310 (P&H)(FB) that the decision of the departmental authorities in appeal does not operate as res judicata when proceedings are initiated under section 10(1) of the Act for adjudicating an industrial dispute.
In view of the decision of the Full Bench in The Ambala Central Co-operative Bank's case (supra), the reference made by the State Government could not be held to be invalid.
3.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed and the impugned award set aside.
Since the dispute has not been decided on merits, the case is remanded to the Labour Court to dispose of the same on merits and in accordance with law after affording an opportunity of hearing to both the parties.
Parties through their counsel have been directed to appear before the Labour Court on 8.4.1996.
There is no order as to costs.
Keeping in view the fact that the reference of the dispute was made in the year 1984, the Labour Court is directed to dispose of the same within six months.