THB Chalapathi, J - The writ petitioner filed this writ petition seeking a direction to the Authorities to admit him in MS (General Surgery) under sports quota.
2.
The Government of Punjab issued a notification in the year 1962 reserving 2 per cent of seats in the Medical Colleges including Post-graduate Courses under sports quota.
The petitioner applied for admission in the Discipline of MS General Surgery and he was also interviewed but he was not given admission on the ground that the reservation under sports quota was not applicable to Post-Graduate Courses.
Therefore, he approached this court seeking a direction to admit him to MS General Surgery as there was no other candidate under that category for admission into the speciality in MS General Surgery.
3.
Another person namely Dr. Ashutosh Kaushal who is also similarly placed, filed civil writ petition No. 4119 of 1989 claiming admission into MS Course under sports quota in this Court.
The said writ petition was heard by a Single Judge of the Court and the said writ petition was allowed by an order of this Court dated 3151989.
The State of Punjab preferred Letters Patent Appeal No. 1410 of 1989, which was dismissed on 1271989.
Thus Dr. Ashutosh Kaushal got admission in MS Surgery under sports quota and completed his course.
The petitioner also filed this petition in the year 1989 and by an interim order dated 6111989, this Court directed the petitioner to be granted provisional admission in MS (General Surgery) Classes in Govt. Medical College, Patiala.
In pursuance of the interim order issued by this Court, the petitioner was also admitted in MS (General Surgery) Course in the Govt. Medical College, Patiala.
It is also an admitted fact that the petitioner completed his course by now in MS (General Surgery).
The result of the petitioner in regard to Part-I was declared and he was successful but the result of Part-II examination has been withheld by the Punjabi University on the ground that there was no specific direction from the Court.
The petitioner filed C.M.
No. 6069 of 1995 for a direction to declare the result of the petitioner in Part-II examination.
This application was filed on 3151995.
In that application, a direction was given on 1071995 to post the main case for hearing.
4.
Thus it is evident from the facts narrated above that the petitioner has completed his MS Course (General Surgery) and also appeared for Part-II examination.
He got admission by virtue of an interim order in 1989.
His case is similar to that of Dr. Ashutosh Kaushal.
The writ filed by Dr. Ashutosh Kaushal as already stated has been allowed by this Court in 1989 itself and Letters Parent Appeal was also dismissed.
I am also told by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the Special Leave Petition No. 9645 of 1989 filed by the State in the apex Court was also dismissed on 3181989.
In these circumstances, the petitioner cannot be treated differently from the case of Dr. Ashutosh Kaushal.
The writ petition is, therefore, to be allowed.
5.
The writ petition is accordingly allowed and the Punjabi University Patiala is directed to declare the result of the petitioner forthwith.