Dr. MK Sharma, J - In this writ petition, the petitioner has sought for a direction to the respondent to promote the petitioner to the post of Deputy Manager (General) with effect from 6121974, the date with effect from which his juniors to the aforesaid post were promoted by enforcing and giving effect to the judgment and order of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 36/1975 disposed of on 1721983.
2.
The petitioner was initially appointed as Emergency Commissioned Officer in the Indian Army on 2791973 and he served the Army upto 31101967, when he was released therefrom.
Thereafter, the petitioner was appointed as a Senior Assistant Manager through a process of selection for direct recruitment in the respondent Corporation on 1321974 against the post reserved for Emergency Commissioner Officers.
The petitioner placed reliance on a circular of the Corporation issued on 1161974 whereby, the released Emergency Commissioned Officers appointed to the various posts under the respondent against the vacancies reserved for released Emergency Commissioned Officers are entitled to count the service rendered by them as Emergency Commissioned Officers, including the period of training, if any, towards seniority in the post of the Corporation.
3.
The petitioner was appointed as Senior Assistant Manager on 1321974.
As he was appointed as Senior Assistant Manager against the post reserved for released Emergency Commissioned Officers, he was entitled to the benefit of the earlier service rendered by him in the Army for the purpose of computing his seniority.
On the basis of the criteria laid down under the aforesaid circular, the petitioner became entitled to be considered for promotion to the next higher post of Deputy Manager (General) in 1974 itself when a number of persons junior to the petitioner were considered and eventually promoted as Deputy Manager (General).
However, the petitioner and a number of similarly situated other released Emergency Commissioned Officers who were appointed to the post of Senior Assistant Managers in the Corporation and who had become entitled to be considered for promotion in the year 1974 on taking into consideration their seniority counted after taking into account the service rendered as Emergency Commissioned Officers are not considered on the ground that for being eligible for promotion to the higher post of Deputy Manager (General), it was incumbent for a Senior Assistant Manager to have rendered at least three years' service in the Corporation.
4.
In the month of the July, 1974, a Departmental Promotion Committee was constituted for considering the cases of the eligible persons to be promoted to the post of Deputy Manager (General) and in pursuance thereof, a number of promotions were made by order dated 6121974 when three persons who are, otherwise, junior to the petitioner if the Army service of the petitioner is counted for the purpose of seniority.
Subsequently, however, the petitioner was promoted to the post of Deputy Manager (General) with effect from November, 1976 after having been selected in another Departmental Promotion Committee held in October, 1976.
5.
Incidentally, a number of released Emergency Commissioned Officers working as Senior Assistant Managers in the Corporation preferred a writ petition in this Court for not considering the cases of the said petitioners for promotion to the post of Deputy Manager (General) in the year 1974, on the basis of their seniority counted after taking into account the service rendered as Emergency Commissioned Officer.
The said writ petition was registered and numbered as C.W.P.
36/1975 and came to be disposed of by this Court on 1721983.
In the said judgment, this Court held that a Senior Assistant Manager appointed as a direct recruit in the Corporation against a vacancy reserved for an Emergency Commissioned Officer should be allowed to count his service rendered by him as Emergency Commissioned Officer towards seniority in the post of Senior Assistant Manager in pursuance of the circular of the Corporation issued on 1161974.
It was further held by this Court that since the petitioners in the above writ petition had to be given the benefit of Army service for computing their seniority in the post of Senior Assistant Manager the result of the same would be that they were deemed to have been appointed as Senior Assistant Manager on the date arrived at after counting the service rendered by them as Emergency Commissioned Officer and once they were so deemed to have been appointed, they had obviously rendered more than three years' service in the Corporation and, therefore, they were entitled to be promoted to the post of Deputy Manager (General) accordingly.
6.
Against the aforesaid judgment rendered by this Court, the Corporation filed Letters Patent Appeal, bening Letters Patent Appeal No. 84/1993 in this Court.
However, the said appeal was dismissed in limine by this Court on 1051983.
As against the said decision the respondent preferred a Special Leave Petition before the Supreme Court which letter on came to be withdrawn by the respondent.
7.
In the meantime, the petitioners to the aforesaid writ petition, in pursuance of the decision of this Court were considered for promotion to the post of Deputy Manager (General) with effect from 1974 and were given consequential benefits as directed in the aforesaid judgment passed by this Court on 1721983.
It may be stated that not only the petitioners of the aforesaid writ petition, but seven others who were not parties to the aforesaid writ petition were also given benefit under the aforesaid judgment.
They were also considered for promotion and were consequently promoted.
However, the petitioner who was senior to at least three persons who were respondents in the earlier writ petition filed in this Court were not given the benefit under the aforesaid judgment and they were not promoted to the post of Deputy Manager (General) with effect from 1974.
Accordingly, the petitioner filed a contempt petition in this Court for initiating a contempt proceeding against the respondent which was registered as C.C.P.
No. 78/1974.
This Court, however, observed that the case of the petitioner is a case for filing a separate writ petition and accordingly dismissed the contempt petition holding that the petitioner might file an independent petition against the respondent for the reliefs that he had sought for in the contempt petition.
Accordingly, this writ petition came to be filed by the petitioner.
8.
The respondents have contested the writ petition by filing counter affidavit stating, inter alia, that pursuant to the judgment passed by this Court in C.W.P.
36/1975, the case of the petitioners therein was required to be considered as on 9.12.1974 and if selected they were to be promoted to the post of Deputy Manager (General) and their proper place of seniority as Deputy Manager (General) had to be assigned to them.
Accordingly, the seniority of the petitioners therein except Mr. ON Tandon who had since expired, were considered along with all their colleagues who were similarly placed and their seniority was refixed.
9.
Based of the refixation of the seniority of the petitioner in the said case and nine of their colleagues who were similarly placed including the present petitioner and also on consideration of the fact that their juniors had been considered for promotion to the post of Deputy Manager (General) in the panel of 1974, they were duly considered for netional promotion to the Grade of Deputy Manager (General) in the 1974 panel by the Promotion Board in the meeting held during the year 1983.
The Promotion Board consequently empanelled a few officers in the 1974 panel.
However, the Board did not empanel the petitioner.
It is stated that none of the juniors to the petitioners was empenalled for promotion to the Grade of Deputy Manager (General) in the 1974 panel.
It is further stated that next promotion panel to the Grade of Deputy Manager (General) was provisionally drawn up on 26.3.1975 and regularised on 2621976.
When the aforesaid panel was drawn up the petitioner was also only considered for promotion based on his seniority fixed up after taking into account his approved military service, including the period of training, if any, and taking into account the principles of merit-cum-seniority.
But, the petitioner could not be empanelled in the said panel.
10.
The next promotion panel to the Grade of Deputy Manager (General) was drawn on 551976 when the case of the petitioner was duly considered for promotion when this panel was drawn after taking into account his approved military service including the period of training, but after taking into account the principles of merit-cum-seniority he could not be empanelled for promotion that time also.
However, in the subsequent panel drawn on 7101976, the case of the petitioner was again considered for promotion and on the basis of the principles of merit-cum-seniority, the petitioner was empanelled in the said panel and was promoted as Deputy Manager (General).
11.
On the basis of the aforesaid pleadings of the parties, Mr. Ravi Gupta appearing for the learned counsel for the petitioner forcefully submitted before me that three juniors to the petitioner were considered for promotion as on 6121974 and later on having been selected were promoted to the post of Deputy Manager (General) and, therefore, the petitioner was entitled to be promoted to the said post with effect from 6121974.
He further submitted that although the criteria for promotion was on merit- cum-seniority, the respective merit of the petitioner vis-a-vis, the said three officers could not be properly assessed as the case of the petitioner came to be considered by Review Departmental Promotion Committee, whereas the names of those three officers juniors to the petitioner came to be assessed by another Departmental Promotion Committee, In view of such assessment by separate Departmental Promotion Committee, no proper assessment could have been made by the Review Departmental Promotion Committee for judging the suitability of the petitioner, vis-a-vis, the aforesaid three officers.
The learned counsel further submitted that a similar direction as given by this Court in C.W.P.
36/1975 is required to be given to the respondent to the effect that since the petitioner is working as Deputy Manager (General) having been so promoted to the said post in the year 1976, his promotion as Deputy Manager (General) would now relate back to 6121974 with all consequential benefits flowing therefrom.
12.
On the other hand, Mr. KA Dewan appearing for the respondent submitted before me that the case of the petitioner was considered for promotion to the post of Deputy Manager (General) to be effective from 6121974 and he was not found suitable for such promotion by the aforesaid Departmental Promotion Committee.
As the criteria for promotion was on the basis of merit-cum-seniority, the petitioner is not entitled to be promoted to the said post as a matter of right.
He submitted that it is a case where the case of the petitioner was considered by the Departmental Promotion Committee who did not find him fit for promotion with effect from 6121974 and even thereafter till 7101976 and, therefore, it is not a case of non- consideration of the case of the petitioner, but is a case of not finding him fit against which no grievance could be raised.
13.
Having considered the pleadings of the parties and the rival submissions of the counsel for the parties, I thought it fit to call for the Minutes of the Meeting of the Review Departmental Promotion Committee in which the case of the petitioner was considered for promotion to the post of Deputy Manager (General) as on 6121974.
I have carefully perused the said proceedings and therefrom, I find that the case of the petitioner for the purpose of promotion to the post of Deputy Manager (General) was considered by the Review Departmental Promotion Committee and after consideration of the case of the petitioner, the Departmental Promotion Committee decided to declare all the 11 officers including the petitioner for inclusion in 1974 panel (provisionally drawn on 1/271974 and regularised on 2021975) above their juniors, if any, empanelled in the said panel.
However, at the next stage against the name of the petitioner it was noted that the would not figure in the said panel.
It is not understood as to why and how after declaring the name of the peitioner to be included in the panel of 1974 it was directed that his name would not figure in the panel.
In the Minutes, no reason has been recorded for omitting his name after declaring his name to be included in the panel.
The aforesaid decision of omitting the name of the petitioner from the panel of 1974, after having declared him fit for promotion and directing for including his name in the panel on 1974 appears to be arbitrary and illegal.
14.
This Court in exercising jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India cannot sit on appeal on the result of the assessment made by the Departmental Promotion Committee.
But the Review Departmental Promotion Committee having found the petitioner fit for promotion and directing him to be included in the panel of 1974 and again at the next stage recording that his name would not figure in the panel without any explanation for taking such a conflicting stand is beyond any intelligible criteria and the said decision of recording that his name would not figure in the panel is ex facie arbitrary and illegal and, therefore, could be interfered with.
This is a case where the petitioner was found fit for inclusion in 1974 panel but still was not included without any plausible explanation thereto.
15.
As the Review Promotion Board decided to declare the petitioner for inclusion in 1974 panel and the petitioner was promoted to the post of Deputy Manager (General) after being empanelled in the panel drawn up on 7101976, the promotion of the petitioner as Deputy Manager (General) should, therefore, relate back to 6121974 with all consequential benefits flowing therefrom as was directed by this Court in C.W.P.
36/1975.
16.
The learned counsel for the respondent raised a preliminary objection regarding unexplained delay and laches on the part of the petitioner to approach this Court.
The said submission has no force at all as the present writ petition was filed after this court directed him to prefer a writ petition instead of the contempt petition which the petitioner preferred and, therefore, the delay, if any, stands explained.
Equally the other objection raised by the respondent about non-joinder of necessary parties, that is, the persons who were promoted to the post of Deputy Manager (General) in between 1975 and 1976 is also without any merit, inasmuch as, the petitioner has challenged in this writ petition denial of promotion to him with effect from 6121974 although he was found fit to be so promoted but not promoted arbitrarily and illegally.
17.
In the result, this writ petition stands allowed.
The appointment of the petitioner as Deputy Manager (General) would now relate back to 6121974 with all consequential benefits flowing therefrom.
No costs.