THB Chalapathi, J - This writ petition is filed to quash the award of the Presiding Officer, Labour Court, dated 14121983 vide Annexure P-9 passed in Reference No. 1180 of 1982.
2.
The petitioner was working in Municipal Corporation, Ludhiana on daily wages.
According to the petitioner, he had been working with the Municipal Corporation, Ludhiana for 8 years prior to the date of his termination on 1451982.
Therefore, he raised an industrial dispute that his services had been illegally terminated and the matter was referred by the Government to the Labour Court for adjudication.
3.
It is the case of the Corporation that the petitioner did not work for 8 years.
He also did not complete 240 days of service and the petitioner himself voluntarily abandoned the service after 1351982.
Therefore, there is no illegal termination of his services.
The workman examined himself as a witness, while the Municipal Corporation examined one witness.
He produced the muster roll from April 1982 to August, 1982.
On the basis of the evidence on record, the Labour Court held that the workman stopped working with effect from 1351982 and that the workman failed to prove that he had worked for 240 days in a calendar year prior to the date of his termination and accordingly rejected the claim of the workman.
4.
Aggrieved by the said award, the workman filled this writ petition.
5.
According to the petitioner, his services were terminated with effect from 1451982.
Within 20 days thereafter, the workman had written a letter to the Municipal Corporation, Ludhiana on 561982, vide Annexure P-1 that he was refused to be taken only duty on 1451982 without any notice or reason and that he served the Corporation for the last about 8 years.
Therefore, he prayed for his reinstatement with full back wages and continuity of service.
As the petitioner did not receive any reply from the Administrator, Municipal Corporation, Ludhiana, he raised an industrial dispute which was referred to the Labour Court, Ludhiana for its decision.
6.
If the petitioner had voluntarily abandoned his service, he would not have raised an industrial disputed within 20 days after the date of his termination.
This aspect of the matter has not at all been referred to or considered by the Labour Court.
Therefore, it cannot be said that the workman stopped working with effect from 1351982.
In the written statement filed by the Management, they never stated that the workman stopped working with effect from 1351982.
Therefore, in my opinion, finding of the Labour Court that the workman stopped working voluntarily from 1351982 is not supported by any acceptable evidence and therefore, the finding of the Labour Court to that effect cannot be sustained.
7.
The Labour Court also declined to grant relief to the workman on the ground that he has not proved that he worked for a period of 240 days prior to the date of his termination.
This finding also, in my opinion, is without any basis.
The Municipal Corporation produced the muster rolls for the month of May, 1982 and also for the month of April, 1982 to August, 1982.
These muster rolls clearly show that the petitioner was working with the Municipal Corporation prior to 1451982.
When the Corporation has taken the trouble of producing the muster rolls from April 1982 to August, 1982, the muster rolls prior to April, 1982 should have also been produced by it to prove its case that the petitioner was not in its employment.
The muster rolls will be in the custody of the Municipal Corporation.
One cannot expect the workman to keep a record of his service.
If really the petitioner has not worked prior to April, 1982, nothing prevented the Corporation from filing the muster rolls for the earlier period for the purpose to show that the petitioner's name did not figure in the muster rolls.
For non-production and failure to produce the relevant record, the Court can legitimately draw an adverse inference against the Municipal Corporation particularly when the record is available with it.
If really the petitioner has not worked prior to April, 1982, the muster rolls would not contain the petitioner's name which will clearly prove that he has not worked prior to April, 1982.
The failure to produce the record by the Municipal Corporation will lead to draw an inference that the name of the petitioner must have found place in the muster roll prior to April, 1982.
In this view of the matter, I am of the opinion that the Labour Court committed an error of law in not drawing an adverse inference against she Municipal Corporation due to its failure to produce the record.
Therefore, I am of the opinion that the award of the Labour Court is liable to be set aside and the petitioner deserves to be reinstated in service.
It is for the Municipal Corporation to plead and prove that the petitioner was not gainfully employed during the period of has absence.
There is no pleading or proof to that effect.
Therefore, the petitioner is entitled to full back wages.
Accordingly, I allow the writ petition, quash the impugned award dated 14121983 and direct the Municipal Corporation, Ludhiana to reinstate the petitioner in service with full back wages and continuity of service within a period of one month from the receipt of a copy of this order.
There will be no order as to costs.