Dr. MK Sharma, J - In this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India the petitioners seek for issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to issue the seniority list of the various Junior Engineers Grade II working with the respondent No. 1 in various projects and also for a direction to the respondents to compute the period for which the members of petitioner No. 1 and petitioners No. 2 and 3 have worked on ad hoc basis, continuously without any break, for the purpose of computation of the length of service/seniority and consequently to give them promotion to the next grade i.e. from Grade II to Grade I The petitioners state that the actions of the respondents in not giving the benefit for the period during which the members of the petitioner No. 1 and the petitioners No. 2 and 3 were continuously working on ad hoc basis on the post of Junior Engineers, that is, from the date of their initial appointment till the date of regularisation during which they had worked continuously and without any break, discharging the same duties as the other regular employees and drawing the same pay scale as that of the said regular employees is violative of the provisions of principles laid down by the Supreme Court as also violative of the provisions of Articles 14, 16, 19 and 21 of the Constitution of India.
2.
The petitioner No. 1 is a registered society and has as its members Diploma Holder Engineers working with respondent No. 1 Corporation.
The petitioner No. 1 has preferred the present writ petition in the representative capacity of the said Diploma Holder Engineers working with respondent No. 1 whereas the petitioners No. 2 and 3 are Junior Engineers working with respondent Corporation.
During the period between 1984-85 the respondent corporation recruited amongst others 20 Junior Engineers including the petitioners No. 2 and 3 through Employment Exchange.
In pursuance of a request made by respondent No. 1 the Employment Exchange sent the names of eligible Diploma Holder Engineers registered with them including the names of respondents No. 2 and 3 to be appointed to the post of Junior Engineer Grade II in they pay scale of Rs. 420-800.
After their names were sponsored by the Employment Exchange the petitioners No. 2 and 3 alongwith the other eligible candidates were asked to undergo the selection process including the viva voce test in which the petitioners No. 2 and 3 about 18 others were declared successful and were appointed against the posts of Junior Engineers Garde II.
However, the dates of appointment of the petitioners No. 2 and 3 and the other 18 persons were different.
It was mentioned in the appointment letter that the selected candidates would be appointed to the post of Junior Engineers on ad hoc basis for a period of six months initially which might be subsequently continued.
After having been appointed thus the petitioner No. 2 and 3 and the members of petitioner No. 1 numbering about 18 for whose cause this petition has been preferred were given extensions and were kept in employment continuously till they were regularised in service by respondent No. 1.
It is stated that these persons appointed to the post of Junior Engineer Grade II discharged the same duties as that of regular employees and were also drawing the same salaries and other benefits as were being given to the regular employes of the Corporation.
It has been specifically averred in the writ petition by the petitioners that while the petitioners were thus working the respondent corporation appointed few persons on regular basis to the post of Junior Engineers Grade II but through the same selection process as was followed in the case of petitioners.
Those candidates were appointed to the post of Junior Engineer Grade II on regular basis after the names of the eligible candidates were called for from the Employment Exchange and after they had undergone the same selection process as that of the petitioners.
3.
In view of an agitation amongst the employees of the respondent Corporation an agreement was arrived at between the petitioner No. 1 and respondent No. 1 whereunder the respondent No. 1 agreed to regularise the services of ad hoc Junior Engineers.
The aforesaid Memorandum was reached on 25111986.
It was agreed that all ad hoc Supervisors working at the projects would be considered for appointment on the regular basis on the existing scales of pay on the basis of seniority-cum-fitness subject to vacancies as might come up from time to time.
It was further stipulated that till such time they are appointed on regular cadre they will continue in service as Junior Engineer Grade II.
Subsequent to the aforesaid agreement arrived at between petitioner No.1 and respondent No. 1 the services of the members of petitioner No. 1 and the petitioners No. 2 and 3 were regularised without undergoing any further process of selection.
However, as no seniority list was published and as no benefit of the period served by the members of petitioner No. 1 and petitioners No. 2 and 3 as ad hoc Junior Engineer Grade II was given for the purpose of computation of their seniority and promotion, the present writ petition has been preferred.
4.
Mr. Rakesh Khanna, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner submitted that so far the first relief that is sought for in the writ petition is concerned, subsequent to the filing of the writ petition the respondent No. 1 has published a draft seniority list but the final list has not been published in view of the order passed by this Court of 781993 and therefore, so far as the first relief is concerned he had nothing much to add.
5.
The next submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the members of petitioner No. 1 and the petitioners No. 2 and 3 have gone through the same selection process for the purpose of their appointment as Junior Engineer Grade II on ad hoc basis as envisaged under the Rules, wherein the selection process for recruitment to the post of Junior Engineer Grade II is prescribed for the purpose of regular appointment and as such their appointment to the post of Junior Engineer Grade II was according to the Rules and therefore, they are entitled to have their seniority counted from the date of their initial appointment and not from the date of regularisation both for the purpose of seniority as also for the purpose of promotion.
In support of his submissions the learned counsel relied upon a decision of the Supreme Court in Direct Recruit Class II Engineering Officers Association v. State of Maharashtra reported in 1990 (II) SSC page 715. the learned counsel further submitted that hostile discrimination is writ large on the face of the records of the case inasmuch as employees appointed on work charge basis have been given the benefit of their entire service whereas the same benefit has been denied to the petitioners who were appointed on ad hoc basis.
6.
Mr. VP Dewan, learned counsel appearing for the respondents took up a preliminary objection in respect to the present case that the persons who have been shown senior to the petitioners are not added as parties to the present writ petition and therefore, in their absence no relief could be granted to the petitioners.
He further submitted that the respondent No. 1 had issued a circular on 2241980 and also another circular on 1641984 wherein it has been categorically laid down under the promotion policy of respondent No. 1 that the ad hoc service would not be taken into account.
The learned counsel stated that the aforesaid promotion policy of respondent No. 1 and the validity and legality of the aforesaid two circulars have not been challenged in the writ petition.
He further pointed out that it was specifically stated in the circular dated 1641984 that ad hoc service was not to be counted for computing the qualifying period for the purpose of promotion.
The aforesaid conditions were also specifically brought to the notice of the petitioners even at the time of their appointment incorporating a clause in their appointment letters to the effect that throughout their service on ad hoc basis in the project they would be subject to the Conduct and Disciplinary Rules and such other Service Rules, Regulations and Orders as are in force from time to time.
On the basis thereof the learned counsel submitted that the petitioners being fully aware of the aforesaid promotion policy and the provisions incorporated in the administrative orders that the petitioners would not be entitled to the benefit of the ad hoc service for computing the qualifying period for the purpose of promotion they are debarred from agitating against denial of the aforesaid benefit at this stage.
The learned counsel in support of his submission relied upon a decision of the Supreme Court in Dr. MA Haq and others v. Union of India and others, reported in 1993(1) LLJ 1139 : 1993(2) SCT 618(SC).
7.
In reply to the aforesaid submission of the learned counsel for the respondent, the learned counsel for the petitioner submitted before me that a circular or administrative instruction cannot run contrary to the Rules and in that view of the matter the circulars dated 2441980 and 1641984 relied upon by the counsel for the respondents could not be enforced, the same being contrary to the Rules of the Corporation and also being contrary to law laid down by the Supreme Court.
8.
Before I appreciate the rival contentions of the learned counsel appearing for the parties it would be necessary to look through the provisions of the Rules, relied upon by the learned counsel for the parties, called the National Hydroelectric Power Corporation Limited Recruitment Rules (hereinafter referred to as the Rules).
The said rules are applicable to all persons appointed against regular posts in connection with the affairs of the Corporation and that the same shall not apply to appointment of casual or work charge basis or on contract basis for specific jobs and periods.
The procedure for recruitment to the various posts under the Corporation have been laid down.
Under the heading for 'Sources of Recruitment' it is laid down that methods of recruitment would be (a) through direct recruitment from outside candidates, (b) through promotion of existing employees from the lower scales, (c) through Employment Exchanges, (d) through deputation from Central/State Governments or Public Sector Enterprises, and (e) through recruitment of persons declared as surplus by the Government and other Public Enterprises etc.  9.
Rule 52 of the said Rules specifies as to how direct recruitment from outside is to be made.
It lays down that the method of recruitment could be by inviting applications by open advertisements or could be from the existing employees of the Corporation who could also apply for the posts advertised in the press.
Thereafter, the respondent is to hold written competitive examination/test or oral examination by means of interviews of candidates by a Selection Committee.
10.
Rule 5.13, on the other hand provides for determining the seniority of the persons employed in the Corporation.
Under the said provision it is laid down that the seniority in essence means length of service in a particular post or grade and thus the seniority shall be determined with reference to the date of appointment in a particular post or grade.
11.
On appreciation of the records available before me and on hearing the parties I find that the members of the petitioner No. 1 and petitioners No. 2 and 3 were appointed to the post of Junior Engineer Grade II on ad hoc basis by the respondent No. 1 after their names were sponsored by the Employment Exchange after the vacancies were notified by respondent No. 1 under the provisions of Employment Exchanges (Compulsory Notification of Vacancies) Act, 1959, which as one of the modes of recruitment recognised by the Rules as a source of recruitment for appointment against the regular posts.
The said petitioners were also directed to appear before the Selection Committee and after they were interviewed by the Selection Committee and after having been found suitable they were so appointed by the respondent No. 1.
It is necessary to note that the aforesaid process of selection by the Selection Committee is also the method of recruitment recognised under the provisions of the Rules enumerated above.
The petitioners have categorically asserted in the writ petition that there are many instances where regular appointments were made by the respondent No. 1 to the post of Junior Engineer Grade II resorting to the same procedure as was adopted by the respondent No. 1 at the time of selection and appointment of the petitioners on ad hoc basis to the said post, to which there is no rebuttal by the respondents.
Therefore, I have no hesitation in my mind to hold that the petitioners were appointed to the post of Junior Engineer Grade II on ad hoc basis having been selected according to the procedure laid down for selection and appointment of regular employees to the post of Junior Engineer, and therefore, their appointment to the aforesaid posts was in accordance with the method provided for recruitment under the Rules although on ad hoc basis.
12.
Consequent to the aforesaid conclusion, the ratio of the decision in Direct Recruitment Class II Engineering Officers Association case (supra) becomes applicable to the facts and circumstances of the present case.
In the said case the Supreme Court has said that once an incumbent is appointed to a post according to Rules, his seniority has to be counted from the date of his appointment and not according to the date of his confirmation.
However, in the same breath the Supreme Court also observed that the corollary of the above rule is that where the initial appointment is only ad hoc and not according to Rules and made as a stop-gap arrangement, the officiation in such posts cannot be taken into account for considering the seniority.
The Supreme Court had further held that if the initial appointment is not made by following the procedure laid down by the rules but the appointee continues in the post interrupted till regularisation of his services in accordance with the Rules the period of his officiation in service will be counted.
13.
On the other hand, the ratio of the decision in Dr. MA Haq's case (supra) relied upon by the learned counsel for the respondents on a closer scrutiny is not applicable to the facts of the present case as the facts of the said case and of the present case are distinguishable .
In Dr. MA Haq's case (supra) the Supreme Court found that the petitioner/applicant in that case fell in an altogether different category not covered under any of the guidelines given in Direct Recruitment Class II Engineering Officers Association case.
In the said case the Supreme Court held that since the recruitment of the petitioner was not done by the Public Service Commission but at the direction of the Court, the same was not a recruitment within the ambit of the Rules and therefore, the ratio of the decision in Direct Recruit Class II Engineering Officers Association's case was held to be not applicable in the said case.
Thus the ratio of the said case, in my opinion, is not applicable to the facts of the present case also.
14.
Now coming to the next argument of the learned counsel for the respondents that in view of the promotion policy and circulars issued by respondent No. 1 laying down that the ad hoc service would not be counted for the purpose of computing the seniority and as a qualifying period for the purpose of promotion the same appears to lay down certain provisions which appear to be contrary to the provisions of the Rules enumerated above and also the principles laid down by the Supreme Court in Direct Recruit Class II Engineering Officers Association case (supra).
It is well settled that a circular or administrative instruction cannot run contrary to the Rules.
If we follow the aforesaid principles laid down under the Administrative law the circulars dated 2441980 and 1641984 referred to and relied upon by the learned counsel for the respondents cannot be made applicable so far they are contrary to the Rules discussed and to the law that has been laid down by the Supreme Court.
15.
The records further reveal that benefit of the services rendered by work charge employees has been made available to them by the respondent No. 1 for the purpose of computation of seniority and for grant of promotion.
Although the petitioners were appointed on ad hoc basis but were granted salary and emolumets in the grade and also increments thereto as were given to the work charge employees but the petitioners were denied the benefit of the ad hoc service rendered by them, whereas the said benefits were extended by respondent No. 1 to the work charge employees.
Therefore, there appears to be a clear discrimination so far grant of the benefit of the ad hoc/work charge services are concerned in respect of the ad hoc employees and the work charge employees.
The respondents have failed to show any justifiable ground for refusing to extend the same benefits of computing the period of ad hoc service rendered by an ad hoc employee for the purposes of computation of seniority whereas similar benefits are extended to almost similarly situated persons like work charge employees.
16.
The only conclusion that could be derived from the aforesaid discussions and findings is that the respondents acted illegally and arbitrarily in denying the benefit of the services rendered by the petitioners as ad hoc employees in the posts of Junior Engineer Grade II till the period of their regularisation by respondent No. 1 both for the purpose of computation of seniority and also for computing the said period for the purpose of promotion and consequently, the said actions are liable to be held to be invalid.
17.
In the result, I issue a direction to the respondents to compute the services rendered by the members of the petitioners No. 1 and petitioners No. 2 and 3 as ad hoc Junior Engineers Grade II for the purpose of computation of their seniority.
After computation of the said period towards the seniority of the petitioners the final seniority list in the grade of Junior Engineers Grade II shall be published by respondent No 1.
The petitioners herein shall be entitled to all consequential benefits including promotion, if they are otherwise so entitled to.
With the aforesaid observations and directions the writ petition is allowed to the extent indicated above but without any order as to costs.