THB Chalapathi, J - This writ petition is filed by the workmen of Mohan Spinning Mill at Rohtak for issuing a writ of mandamus directing the State of Haryana to refer the dispute to the Labour Court for determination under Section 10 of the Industrial Disputes Act (hereinafter referred to as the 'Act').
2.
The petitioners are working as Helpers in Mohan Spinning Mill at Rohtak.
According to them, the Management resorted to illegal lock out on November 7, 1991, and the union of employees protested and agitated for withdrawing the lock out.
Subsequently, on April 4, 1992, the Management resumed the functioning of the Mill after withdrawing the lock out.
According to the petitioners, they went to the Mill for attending their duties but the Management did not allow them to resume their duties.
Therefore, they served a demand notice under Section 2-A of the Act and the petitioners requested through their union for making a reference of the dispute to the Labour Court, as the petitioners were illegally prevented from resuming their duties after withdrawing the lock out.
Accordingly, a demand notice was made for referring the matter to the Labour Court for its determination.
The State of Haryana declined to refer the dispute for adjudication to the Labour Court vide its order dated August 6, 1993 (Annexure P-3).
Challenging the said order and seeking a writ of mandamus directing the Government to refer the dispute to the Labour Court, the petitioners have approached this Court by way of this Writ Petition.
3.
There is no dispute that the petitioners were working in the Mohan Spinning Mill as Helpers.
According to the petitioners, the Management illegally declared lock out on November 7, 1991.
It is the further case of the petitioners that when they went to the Mill to resume their duties, they were not allowed to enter the premises of the Mill and, thus, the Management dispensed with their services.
Therefore, they raised an industrial dispute and requested the State Government to make a reference to the Labour Court for adjudication of the dispute under section 10(1) of the Act.
Section 10(1) of the Act provides that "Where the appropriate Government is of the opinion that any industrial dispute exists or is apprehended, it may at any time, by order in writing:-  (a) refer the dispute to a Board for promoting a settlement thereof; or (b) refer any matter appearing to be connected with or relevant to the dispute to a Court for inquiry."
It is now settled law that it is not open to the Government to go into the merits of the dispute concerned once an industrial dispute does exist and it is incumbent on the part of the Government to make a reference.
It is not for the Government to go into the merits of the dispute and decide the same.
It is pertinent to note that the Government declined to refer the dispute to the Labour Court for adjudication on the ground that it has transpired that after scrutiny, all the petitioners were to join the duty by April 15, 1992, in accordance with the compromise dated March 30, 1992, but the petitioners did not join the duty inspite of the publication in the newspaper, to that effect.
But according to the case of the petitioners, they attended the Mill after withdrawing of the lock out and after resumption of the functioning of the Mill, but they were prevented by the Management to enter the premises, which amounts to dispensing with their services in the Mill.
This is a matter to be decided by the Labour Court alone.
It is not for the Government to state that the petitioners did not join the duty by April 15, 1992, in accordance with the compromise dated March 30, 1992.
The fact whether the petitioners went to the Mill to resume their duties, is a question of fact which has to be gone into only by the Labour Court.
This disputed question of fact cannot be decided by the Government while considering whether there exists an industrial dispute.
On the facts of the case, there cannot be any dispute, that an industrial dispute does exist and, therefore, it is incumbent on the State Government to refer the matter to the Labour Court for adjudication under the provisions of Section 10(1) of the Act.
I, therefore, am of the opinion that the Writ Petition is liable to be allowed.
The writ petition is, therefore, allowed and the State Government is directed to make a reference to the Labour Court for adjudication within one month from today.
However, there will be no order as to costs.