GS Singhvi, J - The award passed by the Labour Court, Jalandhar on 16.10.1995 directing reinstatement of respondent-workman with full back wages and with all consequential benefits has been challenged by the employer only on the ground that after deciding the issue of fairness of enquiry in favour of the workman, the Labour Court ought to have given an opportunity to the petitioner to lead evidence to substantiate the allegation of misconduct levelled against the workman.
2.
A perusal of the written statement filed on behalf of the employer before the Labour Court shows that an attempt was made by the petitioner to justify the action taken by them by way of dismissal of the workman from service on the basis of domestic enquiry.
At the same time the petitioners had made a prayer that in case the issue of fairness of domestic enquiry is decided against them, an opportunity be given to them to adduce evidence to support the allegation of mis-conduct.
3.
The Labour Court examined the rival cases and by giving detailed reasons it held that the domestic enquiry got conducted by the employer was not consistent with the rule of natural justice inasmuch as reasonable opportunity of defence was not afforded to the workman.
After recording this conclusion, the Labour Court did not give opportunity to the employer to lead evidence but passed the impugned award declaring termination of the service of the workman as unlawful and ordering his reinstatement with consequential benefits.
4.
Prior to 1971 view taken by the Supreme Court in the case of defective domestic enquiry was that the Labour Court or the Tribunal can declare the enquiry to be bad leaving the employer free to hold a fresh enquiry into the same set of allegations.
In Delhi Cloth and General Mills Company v. Ludh Budh Singh, AIR 1972 SC 1031, their Lordships made a departure from the earlier decision and held that if no domestic enquiry is held by the employer or domestic enquiry held by the employer is found to be defective, the employer can make a request to the Labour Court/Industrial Tribunal for permission to adduce evidence to support the action taken by it.
The Supreme Court held that if the employer makes such a request at an appropriate stage, the Labour Court/Tribunal is duty bound to give such opportunity to the employer.
In that event a corresponding opportunity is to be given to the employee to adduce evidence in support of its defence.
This view has been reiterated in Workmen of M/s Firestone Tyre & Rubber Company of India (P) Ltd v. Management, AIR 1973 SC 1227, and Shankar Chakravarti v. Britannia Biscuit Co Ltd and another, AIR 1979 SC 1652.
In Desh Raj Gupta v. Industrial Tribunal IV, UP, Lucknow and another, AIR 1990 SC 2174 : 1991(1) SCT 86(SC), their Lordships extended this principle to a case where the Tribunal has suo-moto called upon the employer to make an attempt to justify its action.
5.
In the instant case, the employer at the very threshold of proceedings made a request to the Labour Court to decide the issue of fairness of the enquiry and give an opportunity to them to adduce evidence in case decision of that issue was adverse to the employer.
This having been done, the Labour Court was duty bound to call upon the employer to adduce evidence to substantiate the allegation of misconduct and/or to justify its decision to dismiss the workman from service.
That having not been done, it must be held that the impugned award suffers from error of law apparent on the face of it and therefore, it is liable to be quashed.
6.
Consequently, we allow the writ petition and quash the impugned award annexure P/2 and remand the case to the Labour Court, Jalandhar for fresh decision.
The Labour Court is directed to give opportunity to the employer to lead evidence in support of their action to dismiss the workman from service.
The workman-Jaswant Singh shall also be given opportunity to adduce evidence in his defence.
It is also made clear that if the Labour Court comes to the conclusion that the action taken by the employer is justified then such decision shall operate prospectively and the theory of relation back shall not be invoked by the Labour Court so as to make the punishment applicable with retrospective effect.
In such an eventuality, the Labour Court shall have to decide the amount of wages payable to the workman while keeping in view the plea of gainful employment if any, raised by the employer.
Since the matter has become quite old, we direct the Labour Court, Jalandhar to decide to matter afresh within a period of six months of the submission of the certified copy of this order.
Both the parties are directed to appear before the Labour Court, Jalandhar on May 29, 1996.