Sat Pal, J. (Oral) - This petition has been filed by the petitioner under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India and in this petition, the petitioner has prayed for a writ of mandamus directing the respondents especially respondent No. 2 to admit the petitioner to the Mechanical Engineering (Production Engineering and Industrial Management) course commencing from August, 1992 in the respondent-College against a seat reserved for the wards of defence personnel.
2.
Briefly stated that facts of the case are that a combined entrance test is conducted for determining the inter se merit of the candidates who appear in such test for admission to various disciplines of Engineering to various Colleges of the Panjab University, Chandigarh and Punjabi University, Patiala situated in the State of Punjab and UT Chandigarh.
The petitioner appeared in the combined entrance test in the year 1992-93 against one of the seats reserved for defence personnel (Ex-servicemen).
As per prospectus of the respondent Colleges for the session 1992-93, a candidate was eligible for admission to the first year of BE Programme only if he/she was a bona fide resident of Punjab State and was of Punjab Domicile.
The domicile of Punjab of a candidate was to be determined in terms of the instructions issued by the department of personnel and administrative reforms (Personnel Policies Branch), Government of Punjab contained in their circular dated 12th March, 1982, copy of which has been annexed as Annexure P 2 with the writ petition.
In terms of instructions Annexure P2, inter alia, the children/wards of the employees of the State Government undertaking who are posted in Chandigarh or in Punjab in connection with the affairs of the Punjab Government were eligible for the grant of domicile certificate provided that parents/guardians of persons belonging to any of the categories mentioned therein were citizen of India and produced affidavit to the effect that they or their children/wards had not obtained the benefit of domicile in any other State.
3.
The case of the petitioner is that he fulfilled all the conditions set out in the prospectus but still he was denied admission by the Principal, College of Engineering & Technology, Bhatinda, (respondent No. 2) hereinabove.
He, therefore, filed the present petition for directions to respondent No. 2 to admit him to the Mechanical Engineering (PE&IM) course.
This petition came up for hearing before a DB of this Court on 27th August, 1992 and notice of motion was issued to the respondents on that date for 3181992.
On 3181992 none appeared on behalf of respondents No. 1 and 2 despite service.
Accordingly, the petition was admitted and the respondents were directed to admit the petitioner to Mechanical Engineering course subject to the result of the writ petition, if he was entitled to on merits in the respective category.
Pursuant to the aforesaid orders passed by this Court, the petitioner was admitted to the Mechnacial Engineering (PE&IM) course on 23rd September, 1992 as he was entitled to on merit in the said category.
4.
During the pendency of the writ petition the petitioner has already appeared upto 7th semester and his result upto 3rd semester has already been declared under the orders of this Court and he has passed in the said three semesters.
The petitioner is now to appear only in last semester i.e. 8th semester and the examination in the said 8th semester is to commence in May, 1996.
5.
Separate written statements - one on behalf of respondents 1 and 2 and another on behalf of respondent No. 3 - have been filed.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondents 1 and 2, inter alia, it has been stated that the petitioner had submitted his application form well within time and he had produced domicile certificate (Annexure P.3) but the petitioner had not submitted affidavit of his parents/guardians that they or their children/wards had not obtained the benefit of domicile in any other State.
It was further stated that in column No. 5 of the application the petitioner had stated that he was domicile of Himachal Pradesh and in column X he had mentioned that his father was serving in a private firm and he had not attached the certificate of Punjab domicile in accordance with the instructions contained in Annexure P2.
It was in these circumstances that the petitioner was not given admission by respondent No. 2 in the Mechanical Branch.
It was, however admitted, that the petitioner was otherwise eligible to be admitted as per merit list.
6.
Mr. Khindria, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner submitted that alongwith the admission form the petitioner had submitted domicile certificate dated 2561992 copy of which is Annexure P.3.
He, however, submitted that after he came to know that domicile certificate was to be issued by the Managing Director of the Corporation, he obtained the same from the Managing Director on 11.8.1992 and copy of the said domicile certificate is Annexure P.6.
He further submitted that affidavit containing statement that the petitioner had not obtained any benefit of domicile in any other State was submitted to the employer of the father of the petitioner and it was thereafter that the Managing Director of Punjab Communication Ltd had issued domicile certificate (Annexure P.6).
Lastly he contented that course of Mechanical Engineering (PE&IM) consist of 8 semesters and under the orders of this Court, the petitioner has already appeared in seven semesters and in the last (8th) semester the petitioner had already completed his attendance and he was to appear in this semester in May, 1996.
He further submitted that under the orders of this Court the results of the first three semesters have already been declared by the respondents and as per result the petitioner had passed in the said three semesters.
He, therefore, contended that in case this Hon'ble Court comes to the conclusion that the petitioner was not entitled to be admitted in the said course, a lenient view should be taken in the matter and the respondents should be directed to allow the petitioner to appear in the 8th semester against the seat which was given to the petitioner on the basis of interim orders passed by this Hon'ble Court and the respondents should be directed to declare his results for 4th semester to 7th semester as well as for 8th semester.
In support of his submission he placed reliance on two judgments of the Supreme Court in Anil Baipadithaya v. State of Karnataka, 1995(5) SLR 758 : 1996(1) SCT 515(SC); Miss Anamika Bishnoi v. Ms. Manju Chaudhary, 1996(1) SLR 737 and a judgment of this Court in Roumika Yadav v. Maharishi Dayanand University, Rohtak, 1995(5) SLR 462.
7.
Shri Sukhbir Singh Mattewal, learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondents 1 and 2 submitted that the petitioner had not submitted the domicile certificate strictly in accordance with the instructions contained in Annexure P2.
He further submitted that the petitioner had not even submitted an affidavit of the parents of the petitioner to the effect that they or their wars/child had not obtained benefit of domicile in any other State.
He, therefore, submitted that the petitioner was not entitled to any relief claimed in this petition.
Lastly he submitted that in case the writ petition is allowed on the grounds that the petitioner had already appeared in 7 out of 8 semesters it should be made clear that this judgment will not be cited as precedent for future cases.
Shri Gur Rattan Pal Singh, learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondent No. 3 reiterated the submissions made by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondents 1 and 2.
8.
I have given my thoughtful consideration to the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties and have perused the record.
9.
In terms of the instructions issued by the Punjab Government, copy of which is Annexure P2, every candidate who was claiming benefit of domicile was required to furnish domicile certificate subject to the condition that parents/guardians of such candidate are citizens of India and they produce an affidavit to the effect that they or their children/wards have not obtained benefit of domicile in any other State.
The contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the said affidavit was submitted before the employer of the father of the petitioner and he has shown me a copy of the said affidavit, during the course of arguments, but copy of that affidavit shows that this affidavit was signed and sworn by the petitioner himself and not by his father/mother/guardian.
The leaned counsel for the petitioner has, however, today filed another affidavit of Shri SP Chaudhary, who is father of the petitioner, which is taken on record.
In para 5 of this affidavit it has been stated that neither deponent nor his children including the petitioner Suresh Kumar Chaudhary have ever obtained benefit of domicile of any State other than the State of Punjab.
In terms of the prospectus and instructions contained in Annexure P 2 the affidavit of the father of the petitioner was required to be filed before the last late i.e. 3181992.
As per law laid down by Hon'ble Supreme Court in case Dr. Rekha Chaturvedi v. University of Rajasthan, 1993(1) SLR 544 : 1993(2) SCT 279(SC) a candidate who does not fulfil the condition of eligibility on the last date fixed for the receipt of the application, cannot be considered for appointment.
This view was reiterated by the Apex Court in subsequent decision in UP Public Service Commission v. Alpana, JT 1994(1) SC 94 : 1994(1) SCT 701(SC).
10.
In view of the above legal position it has to be held that the petitioner was not eligible to be considered for admission to the course of mechanical engineering (PE&IM) against a seat reserved for wards of ex- servicemen.
However, keeping in view the facts that the petitioner has already completed seven out of eight semesters and has also appeared in the examination of the first seven semesters and has even qualified in the examination held for three semesters, it will not be just and proper to cancel his admission at this stage.
In that view of the matter it is directed that the petitioner should be allowed to pursue his study in the College of Engineering & Technology, Bhatinda.
The responders are also directed to declare the results of the petitioner for the fourth to 7th semesters and also to allow him to appear in the examination of the 8th semester.
It is, however, made clear that this shall not be treated as precedent for future cases.
The view I have taken finds full support from a recent judgment of this Court in Romika Yadav's case (supra).
11.
With this direction, this writ petition stands disposed.