THB Chalapathi, J (Oral) - This writ petition is filed to direct the Government of Punjab to refer the industrial dispute between the petitioner-workman and the management of the 3rd respondent namely M/s Punjab Communication Limited to the Labour Court for adjudication.
2.
According to the petitioner, he joined the 3rd respondent-Company as an Assistant Grade-II and though he was designated as Assistant Supervisor, Deputy Supervisor and Supervisor Grade-II, his duties are only of clerical nature such as the maintences of registers, upkeep of the record and the files.
It is further case of the petitioner that he was charge-sheeted on 9111991 under the Model Standing Orders and after some inquiry his services were terminated on 23101992.
Thereafter he approached the Government of Punjab to refer the dispute between him and the management of the 3rd respondent to the Labour Court for adjudication.
His request to make a reference to the Labour Court for adjudication has been declined by an order of the Government dated 11.1.1993 vide Annexure P-4 on the ground that the petitioner is not a workman within the meaning of Section 2(s) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as the 'Act') and also on the ground that his services were terminated after holding an inquiry.
3.
In view of the refusal on the part of the State Government to refer the dispute to the Tribunal/Labour Court, the petitioner approached this Court by way of this writ petition.
4.
It is settled law that the State Government has to satisfy itself whether there exists a dispute between the workman and the management for referring it for adjudication to the Labour Court under section 10 of the Act.
It is not open to the Government to make an inquiry into the disputed questions of fact and law.
According to the petitioner, he is a workman because he is only discharging the clerical work and is not doing any supervisory work.
It is further case of the petitioner that none is working under his control.
This disputed question of fact has to be decided by the Labour Court only after recording the evidence.
5.
The Government has also refused to make a reference on the ground that the management has terminated the services of the petitioner after holding an inquiry.
Whether the enquiry is proper or not is also a disputed question of fact which has to be decided by the Labour Court only after recording the evidence in this regard.
As already observed, the State Government has no power to make an inquiry into the correctness of the dispute.
The State Government has to see whether there exists any dispute.
On the facts of the case, I am of the view that there exists a dispute which can be referred to a Labour Court for its adjudication.
6.
I, therefore, allow the writ petition and direct the State of Punjab to refer the dispute between the petitioner and the 3rd respondent to the Labour Court/Tribunal for adjudication in accordance with law within two months from the receipt of a copy of this order.
There will be no order as to costs.