RS Mongia, J - This judgment will dispose of both the Letters Patent Appeal Nos. 287 and 351 of 1981 arising out of the same judgment of the learned Single Judge.
The facts relevant to dispose of these appeals may be noticed.
2.
Shri GS Gill, writ petitioner (now respondent) was working as a Junior Technical Assistant in the Department of Industries of the State of Punjab.
He made a grievance that since there were only two posts of Assistant Superintendent, Quality Marking Centre (Textile) and one of the posts was already being manned by one Chanan Singh, belonging to the Scheduled Castes category, the other post could not have been reserved for the members of Scheduled Castes as had been done by the State Government.
This should have been filled from the general category.
His writ petition was allowed by the learned Single Judge on January 7, 1981 mainly relying on a Division Bench judgment of this Court in Dr. Mrs. Parminder Kaur v. The State of Punjab and others, 1976 (1) SLR 502.
According to the learned Single Judge, in view of the aforesaid Division Bench judgment of this Court and there being no dispute on facts that during the relevant year only one vacancy arose, the same could not have been reserved as it would have amounted to 100% reservation.
Aggrieved by the said judgment, the State of Punjab as well as Shri Bhagat Ram, who was respondent in the writ petition and belongs to the Schedule Castes category and was eligible for appointment as Assistant Superintendent, Quality Marking Centre (Textile), if the post was reserved for scheduled castes, filed the two aforesaid Letters Patent Appeals.
The Bench hearing the Letters Patent Appeals did not feel the necessity to go into the question whether a single vacancy which arose in a particular year could be reserved for the members of schedule castes or not inasmuch as the State Government in its affidavit dated November 13, 1980, filed before the learned Single Judge, had admitted that there were only two post of Assistant Superintendent Quality Marking Centre (Textile) and 50% of these posts were to be filled up by direct recruitment and 50% by promotion from amongst the Junior Technical Assistants of the Taxtile trade.
The Bench hearing the Letters Patent Appeals was of the view that since out of the two posts, one had to be always filled by direct recruitment and one by promotion and separate running rosters had to be kept showing the reserved points for the posts to be filled by direct recruitment and by promotion, the question of reservation under the circumstances did not arise at all as it was a case of single post cadre as one post had to be filled by promotion and one by direct recruitment.
The reliance was placed on the judgment of the Supreme Court in Dr. Chakardhar Paswan v. State of Bihar and others, (sic) 1988 SC 959 which laid down that there can be no reservation for recruitment at initial stage or for filling up future vacancy in respect of the post where there is only one post in the cadre.
Since in the present case it was a single post cadre inasmuch as against the post to be filled by promotion, no direct recruitment could be done and vice versa it was held that there was no question of any reservation.
The Letters Patent Appeals were dismissed.
The State of Punjab and Shri Bhagat Ram took the matter before the Apex Court.
The Apex Court was of the view that the Division Bench hearing the Letters Patent Appeal did not consider the impact of the circular issued by the State Government, dated October 11, 1974 and further the learned Single Judge had observed that if he had not been bound by the Division Bench judgment in Parminder Kaur's case (supra), he may not have interfered with the impugned order reserving the post for the scheduled castes category, even though it was a single vacancy.
In these circumstances, the judgment of the Letters Patent Appeal was set aside and the case was remanded for redeciding the mater in accordance with law.
Before advertising to the arguments of the learned counsel for the parties, we may refer to the instructions, dated October 11, 1974, which read as under :-  "I am directed to refer to the instructions contained in Paragraph 2(4) (b) of Punjab Government circular letter No. 6872-WG- 66/24917, dated the 23rd August, 1966, read with instructions contained in Paragraph 2(iii) of Punjab Government circular letter No. 3378-S (ASC)-67/22108, dated the 5th August, 1967.
According to these instructions, in a cadre of less than five posts if there be only one vacancy, it should be treated as 'Unreserved', but if on this account a reserved point is treated as unreserved, the reservation is to the carried forward to the subsequent two recruitment years.
In view, however, of the judgment of the Supreme Court of India in the case of Arati Ray Choudhary v. Union of India, AIR 1974 SC 532 it has now been decided that the reservation with respect to the solitary vacancy so unreserved and carried forward must be given effect to on the occasion next arising when a solitary vacancy occurs in the same cadre.
2.
The aforementioned instructions may be considered as having been modified to the extent indicated above.
3.
The receipt of this communication may kindly be acknowledged."
3.
These instructions were issued in view of the judgment of the Supreme Court in Arati Ray Choudhary v. Union of India, AIR 1974 SC 532.
According to these instructions, it was laid down that in a cadre of less than five posts, if there is only open vacancy, it should be treated as unreserved despite the fact that it may fall at reserved point and if on this account, the reserved post is treated as unreserved, the reservation is to be carried forward to the subsequent two recruitment years.
In view of the judgment of the Supreme Court in Arati Ray Choudhary's case (supra), it was decided that the reservation with respect to the solitary vacancy so un-reserved and carried forward must be given effect to on the occasion next arising when a solitary vacancy occurs in the cadre; meaning thereby that if initially a solitary vacancy arises and it is meant for the reserved category, it need not be given to the reserved category and be treated as unreserved as it might amount to 100% reservation.
Such vacancy has to be carried forward and if subsequently again only one vacancy arises, it will be given to the reserved category irrespective of the fact that it amounts to 100% reservation.
In other words, the carried forward vacancy can be given to the reserved category even if a solitary vacancy arises.
In Parminder Kaur's case (supra), the Division Bench was of the view that a solitary vacancy which may arise in a cadre of less than five cannot be treated reserved at all.
It had not considered the impact of the aforesaid instructions regarding giving of the carried forward vacancy to a reserved category even though a single vacancy arises in a subsequent year.
4.
Learned counsel for the appellant argued that the judgment of the Division Bench in Parminder Kaur's case (supra) has no application to the facts of the present case inasmuch as according to the instructions dated October 11, 1974, a carried forward vacancy can always be filled up by the reserved category even though single vacancy may arise that year in which the vacancy is carried forward.
This aspect, according to the learned counsel, was not considered by the Division Bench and the learned Single Judge was right in observing that but for the judgment of the Division Bench in Parminder Kaur's case (supra) he would have upheld the decision of the Government reserving the vacancy for the scheduled castes.
5.
It may be noticed here that the learned counsel for the appellant did not dispute that there are only two posts of Assistant Superintendent, Quality Marking Centre (Textile), out of which one post is to be filled by the promotion and the other by direct recruitment and further that separate rosters are to be maintained for filling posts by direct recruitment and by promotion to implement the policy of reservation.
It has been admitted in the written statement filed by the State Government that the cadre and seniority lists of Assistant Superintendents, Senior Technical Assistants and Technical Officers are separate for each trade and qualifications of each cadre posts are according to the job requirements of the posts in each trade.
It may be observed that there are two posts of Assistant Superintendents (Textile), two posts of Assistant Superintendents (Engineering) and one post of Assistant Superintendent Sports and Leather Goods.
While replying to an earlier instance of promoting one Shri ML Suri as Assistant Superintendent, Sports and Leather Goods, it was mentioned, inter-alia, as under :-  "Admitted to the extent that Sh. ML Suri, Assistant Superintendent Government Quality Marking Centre (Sports and Leather Goods), Jullundur was promoted against the post of Superintendent of that centre without clubbing his post with the other posts of Assistant Superintendents in Engineering and Textile Trades.
While recommending his case for promotion to Government it was stated that it should not be added/mixed up with the posts of Superintendents of the other trades because an employee of one trade cannot be promoted against the post of another trade..." 6.
The first question that arises is - Whether the cadre of Assistant Superintendent, Quality Marking Centre (Textile) on the above facts is a single cadre ?
As observed above, though there are two posts, but one is to be filled by promotion and the other by direct recruitment and therefore, so far as promotees are concerned, it is to be taken that it is a single post cadre for promotees and similarly it is a single post cadre for direct recruitees.
As observed above, it has already been held by the Apex Court in Dr. Chakardhar Paswan's case (supra) that in a single post cadre there can be no reservation.
Similarly, a Division Bench of this Court in SS Kalsi v. ML Sehgal, 1981(1) SLR 461, held as under :  "All the aforesaid conclusions lead to the irresistible view that if a single post cadre or a vacancy arising therein is given to reserved category, it would certainly amount to 100% reservation, for all the time he would continue to man the post and so long as he would be there, it would not be even by a fraction of a per cent less than 100.
Therefore, I am of the view that a single post cadre can never be reserved and none of the instructions issued by the State Government would be applicable in the case of such a post."
7.
Regarding the applicability of the instructions relating to the rule of carry-forward, it was observed by the Division Bench in SS Kalsi's case (supra) as under :-  "For implementing the reservation policy of the State Government under which the first vacancy is to be filled by a Scheduled Caste, the roster will have to be guided by the Supreme Court decision in Arati Ray's case, for the State Government itself has indicated in the instructions that the first vacancy in a year shall be given to the general category against the reserved post for Scheduled Castes and the second vacancy which is for the general category shall be given to the Scheduled Castes iSehgaln the subsequent two years or so to the extent to which the carry-forward rule would be applicable in a given case under the instructions.
Therefore, to give effect to the instructions about the roster as also the carry-forward rule, I am of the confirmed view that such instructions would be applicable to a cadre consisting of at least two posts.
Since in the present case there is only one post in the cadre, the instructions are wholly inapplicable."
8.
Consequently, we are of the view that since it is a single post cadre, there could not be any reservation at all and the question of applicability of the instructions dated October 11, 1974 would not arise and further the question of application of Parminder Kaur's case (supra), also does not arise on the facts of the present case.
Therefore, we have no hesitation in upholding the judgment of the learned Single Judge, though for different reasons.
9.
For the foregoing reasons, we find no merit in these appeals, which are hereby dismissed.