RS Mongia, J - The petitioner was enrolled in the Army as a Sepoy on March 8, 1961.
He was discharged from the Army on April 1, 1976, and while in the Army, he was awarded Sangram Medal, Pachmi Star, Samar Sevi Star 1965, Raksha Medal 1965 and Sena Sewa Medal.
After the release from the Army, he was employed as Security Guard in the Punjab State Electricity Board (in short 'the Board') on February 28, 1979.
The Punjab Government had framed Rules known as Punjab Government National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965, whereby the persons, who were employed in the Army and had worked during the Emergency from October 26, 1962, to January 10, 1968, and joined Civil Service thereafter were to be given certain benefits of Military service during the Emergency for purpose of seniority, pay fixation etc.
These Rules had been adopted by the Board.
The period, as observed above, for which the benefit of Military service was to be given is not the entire Military service but only which is rendered during the period of Emergency.
2.
The petitioner represented to the Board for the grant of Military service benefits.
However, the same was rejected vide the impugned order dated April 7, 1995, on the ground that as per the Board instructions dated April 21, 1987, benefit of Military service is to be given to only those employees who were recruited in the Military service during the Emergency i.e. from October 26, 1962 to January 10, 1968, and not to the persons who were employed in the Military service prior to October 26, 1962.
3.
The instructions dated April 21, 1987, (Annexure P-8) were issued in view of the judgment of the Supreme Court dated April 1, 1986 reported as Ex. Capt.
AS Parmar and others v. State of Haryana and others, AIR 1986 Supreme Court 1183, which judgment was given when a review petition was filed against the judgment dated April 26, 1984, reported as Ex. Capt.
KL Arora and another v. State of Haryana and others, AIR 1987 Supreme Court 1858.
4.
It may be observed here that the Punjab Government National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965, adopted by the respondent-Board do not as such envisage that the incumbents should have joined the Military service during the period of Emergency.
Even if a person had joined the Military service prior to proclamation of Emergency but had served during the period of Emergency, the benefit of military service for the Emergency period is required to be given under the Rules.
5.
The State of Haryana amended the aforesaid Rules in August, 1976, which was to the effect that the benefit of the Military service would be given to those who join civil service after the discharge from the Military service only if they had joined Military service during the period of Emergency and not before that.
This amendment was brought into force with retrospective effect.
6.
The Supreme Court in Ex. Capt.
KL Arora's case (supra) while upholding the amendment to the Rules struck down its retrospective applicability.
In other words, it was held that those persons who had joined civil service on discharge from the Military service after the amendment of the Rules would get the benefit of Military service only if they had joined the Military service during the period of Emergency but those who had joined the civil service before the amendment of the Rules would get the benefit of Military service rendered during the period of Emergency irrespective of the fact whether they had joined the Military service during the period of Emergency or prior thereto.
This judgment came up for some clarification later on and the judgment in review is reported as Ex. Capt.
AS Parmar and others v. State of Haryana and others, AIR 1986 SC 1183.
It so happened that in view of the earlier judgment the benefit of entire Military service was given to the incumbents and it was not confined only to the Military service rendered during the Emergency.
The clarification came that the Military service under the Rules means only that service which was rendered during the Emergency and the incumbent who had joined civil service on discharge from the Military service was entitled to that much service.
Similar view was taken by the Apex Court in Dhan Singh and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1991(1) RSJ 433 : 1991(1) SCT 137.
7.
Applying the principals of the aforesaid judgments of the Apex Court to the facts of the present case, it would be seen that the Board amended its earlier instructions on April 21, 1987, to bring it in conformity with the aforesaid judgment.
Therefore, any incumbent who had joined the service of the Board after April 21, 1987, would be given benefit of the Military service only if he had joined the Military service during the period of Emergency and not prior thereto.
However, those incumbents who had joined the Board service prior to April 21, 1987, would be entitled to the benefit of Military service rendered during the period of Emergency irrespective of the fact whether they had joined Military service during the Emergency or prior thereto.
The petitioner having joined the Board service prior to April 21, 1987, he would be entitled to the benefit of Military service rendered during the period of Emergency towards seniority, pay fixation etc. as per the earlier instructions of the Board read with the relevant rules in that regard adopted by the Board.
8.
Consequently, we allow this writ petition and quash the impugned order dated April 7, 1995, copy Annexure P-7, and direct the respondents to give benefit of Military service to the petitioner for the service rendered by him during the period of Emergency i.e. October 26, 1962 to January 10, 1968, for purpose of seniority, pay fixation etc. as per the instructions of the Board and the relevant rules on the subject.
These directions be carried out within a period of three months of the receipt of copy of this order from this Court or a certified copy thereof from the petitioner.