GS Singhvi, J - This petition has been filed for issue of a mandamus to the respondent No. 1 to grant pension to the petitioner under the Swatantrata Sainik Sammn Pension Scheme, 1980.
2.
The averments made in the writ petition show that the petitioner had joined as Clerk in British Army.
He was posted in Casualty Directorate, Adjutant Generals Branch during the year 1944-45.
The petitioner says that he has participated in the Freedom Movement and in recognition of his contribution, the Government has honoured him by conferring a Tamar Patra.
On 26121945 immediately after the arrest of his Colleague Shri Chanderbal, who had delivered an important file of the then Government to INA Defence Council, the petitioner is said to have been taken to Lower Bazar Police Station at Shimla and was locked up.
While he was in lock-up the petitioner was served with a notice and was charged with the allegation of having acted in a manner prejudicial to the public safety.
On that basis he was detained for two months under Section 129 of the Defence of India Rules which was later on extended to six months.
However, due to intervention of Pandit Jawahar Lal Nehru, the petitioner is said to have been released alongwith Chanderbal.
A case under rule 34/38 of Defence of India Rules was registered against the petitioner on 2771946.
Non-bailable warrants of arrest were issued against the petitioner.
The petitioner surrendered before the Ilaqa Magistrate and moved an application for bail which was accepted.
The Order of the Ilaqa Magistrate was set aside by the District Magistrate and the petitioner was taken into custody.
He was challaned and was tried by the Additional Magistrate, Hoshiarpur.
The petitioner is said to have been convicted on 211947 and sentenced to one year's rigorous imprisonment.
His appeal against the conviction and sentence was accepted by the learned Sessions Judge, Hoshiarpur some time in March, 1947 and he was acquitted.
After independence, the petitioner was awarded Tamar Patra, but his claim for grant of pension has been turned down on the following three grounds :- .
"(i) He was not a member of Indian National Army, (ii) his income exceeded Rs. 5,000/- per annum, and (iii) he was imprisoned for less than six months.
3.
When the writ petition came up for consideration before the Court on 1731986 the petitioner appeared in person.
A Division Bench of this Court issued notice of motion for 1651986.
On that day none appeared for respondent No. 1.
The learned Deputy Advocate General Punjab made a statement that there was no scheme framed by the Punjab Government for grant of pension to the Freedom Fighters.
On the basis of that statement the writ petition was dismissed against respondents No. 2 and 3.
However, as against respondent No. 1, it was admitted.
4.
After over 9 years the case came up for hearing on 20101995.
On that day, neither the petitioner nor any one on his behalf appeared.
Respondent No. 1 was also not represented by anybody.
However, the court took notice of the statement of Mrs. Charu Tuli, Assistant Advocate General, Punjab, who gave out that she would inform the Standing Counsel for the Central Government.
Shri RS Surjewala appeared for Union of India and requested that he may be given time to seek instructions from respondent No. 1.
On the next day Shri Surjewala made a statement that Freedom Fighters' Pension was payable by the Assistant Commissioner Defence Accounts Tigri Road, Delhi Cantt.
and Controller of Combined Defence Accounts (Pension), Allahabad.
Mrs. Charu Tuli submitted that Shri HS Giani, Advocate, had been representing Union of India in similar type of cases and he would be able to assist the Court.
Accordingly, the Court directed that Shri HS Giani, Advocate, be informed to assist the Court.
Shri HS Giani appeared on November 8, 1995 and sought some time to place relevant instructions.
At the same time the Court directed that notice be issued to the petitioner at his address given in the writ petition.
The case was taken on November 28, 1995.
On that day none appeared on behalf of the petitioner Shri Giani filed a short written statement on behalf of the Union of India.
On Court's request Shri Rajesh Gumbar, Advocate, agreed to assist the Court on behalf of the petitioner.
5.
I have heard Shri Rajesh Gumbar for the petitioner and Shri HS Giani, Advocate, who has appeared on behalf of respondent No. 1 and carefully perused the record of the case.
6.
Argument of Shri Gumbar is that the petitioner has been imprisoned on more than one occasion in connection with the Freedom Movement and although a specific date has not been disclosed in the Writ Petition, an inference can be drawn from his pleadings that he had suffered imprisonment for a period of more than six months and, therefore, the petitioner must be treated as fulfilling all the conditions necessary for grant of Swatantrata Sainik Samman Pension.
Shri Gumbar invited the Court's attention to the fact that the petitioner was arrested on 26121945 and was kept in detention for a sufficiently long period till his release on the intervention of Pandit Jawahar Lal Nehru and this period could not be less than two months.
Shri Gumbar further pointed out that the petitioner was again arrested on 3/4th of September, 1946 and he remained in custody till March 1947 when he was ultimately acquitted by the Sessions Judge, Hoshiarpur and thus it can be said that the petitioner has remained imprisoned for more than six months.
Shri Gumbar further submitted that the very award of Tamar Patra to the petitioner is a proof of his participation in the Freedom Movement and, therefore, there is no reason or justification for the respondent No. 1 to deny benefit of Swatantrata Sainik Samman Pension.
7.
Shri Giani submitted that in terms of the Swatantarta Samman Pension Scheme, 1980 which has been made effective from August 15, 1972, pension can be given only to those who fulfil the conditions enumerated in para 4 and who produce proof in support of their claim as per para 9 of the said scheme, but because the petitioner has not been able to furnish proof regarding this imprisonment for a period of six months, the respondent No. 1 cannot grant him pension.
Shri Giani very fairly stated that even if now the petitioner submits proof to show that he had remained in prison for a period of six months, the respondent No. 1 will grant him the benefit of pension.
Paragraphs 4 and 9 of the Scheme of 1980 are reproduced below :-  Para 4 Who is Eligible "For the purpose of grant of Samman Pension under the Scheme, a freedom fighter is : (a) A person who had suffered a minimum imprisonment of six months in the mainland jails before independence.
However, Ex-INA personnel will be eligible for pension if the imprisonment/detention suffered by them was outside India.
(b) The minimum period of actual imprisonment for eligibility of pension has been reduced to three months in the case of women and SC/ST freedom fighters from 181980."
"Para 9 How to prove the claims (Evidence required) The applicant should furnish the documents indicated below whichever is applicable  (a) Imprisonment/Detention etc.
Certificate from the concerned Jail Authorities, District Magistrate or the State Government.
In case of non-availability of such certificates, co-prisoner certificates from a sitting M.P. or M.L.A.
or from an Ex. M.P. or Ex. M.L.A.
specifying the jail period (Annexure-I application form).
(b) Remained Under Ground (i) Documentary evidence by way of Courts/Govt.
's Orders proclaiming the applicant as an offender announcing an award on his head or for his arrest or ordering his detention.
(ii) Certificates from veteran freedom fighters who had themselves undergone imprisonment for five years or more if the official records are not forthcoming due to their non-availability.
(c) Internment or Externment : (i) Order of internment or externment or any other corroboratory documentary evidence.
(ii) Certificate from prominent freedom fighters who had themselves undergone imprisonment for five years or more if the official records are not available (Annexure II in the application).
Note : The certifier veteran freedom fighters in respect of underground suffering, internment/externment and the applicant should belong to the same administrative unit before the reorganisation of States and their areas of operation must be the same.
(d) Loss of property, job etc. Order of confiscation and sale of property, orders of dismissal or removal from service."
From the above quoted paragraphs of the scheme, it is evident that Swatantrata Sainik Samman Pension is admissible to a person other than a woman or a SC/ST freedom fighter in case he has suffered a minimum imprisonment of six months in the mainland jail before Independence.
Ex.-INA personnel are eligible for pension even for imprisonment/detention suffered by them outside India.
Broken period of imprisonment can also be taken into consideration for the purpose of computing the qualifying period.
Para 9 gives out method of proving how a person is entitled to the grant of pension under 1980 scheme.
No doubt the petitioner has given the dates of his imprisonment/detention as well as the date of his conviction and acquittal, but has not given the particulars of total period of his detention/imprisonment.
Therefore, despite the fact that the Court having utmost sympathy with the petitioner and utmost respect for freedom fighters who contributed to the Independence of the country, it is not possible to issue a mandamus to the respondent No. 1 in the absence of details indicating the total period of detention/imprisonment of the petitioner.
Nevertheless I feel that it would be in the interest of justice to direct that if the petitioner furnishes the details of the total period of his detention and it is found that the fulfils the conditions of six months' imprisonment/detention in terms of clause (4) of 1980 scheme, he shall be given the benefit of the pension under the Scheme and his claim should not be rejected only on the ground of delay.
8.
I may also make it clear that claim of the petitioner cannot be rejected on the ground that he was not a member of INA or that his income is more than Rs. 5,000/- per annum.
These two grounds are not available to respondent No. 1 to reject the claim of the petitioner.
9.
For the reasons stated above, the writ petition is disposed of with a direction that as and when the petitioner furnishes proof before respondent No. 1 showing that he fulfils the conditions specified in clause (4) of Swatantrata Sainik Samman Pension Scheme, 1980, the respondent No. 1 shall give the benefit of this scheme to the petitioner within three months from furnishing of proof by the petitioner and the benefit shall be admissible to him from the date of enforcement of the scheme.
10.
Before concluding, I record my thanks to Sarvshri Rajesh Gumbar and HS Giani, Advocates, who have helped the Court in arriving at a proper decision of the writ petition.