GS Singhvi, J - Shri Mohinder Singh, husband of the petitioner, died on 16.9.1982 while he was serving as security guard in the office of the Executive Engineer, 'OP' Division, HSEB, Jhajjar.
By the time of his death, Mohinder Singh had rendered over 10 years of service.
After the death of Mohinder Singh, respondent-Board sanctioned Rs. 8046/- by way of ex-gratia to the family of the deceased.
On 15.10.1982 the petitioner made an application (Annexure P2) for registration of the name of her son for being provided with employment on his attaining age of majority and on his passing the requisite qualifications.
A similar application was submitted by the petitioner to the Director, Vigilance, Haryana State Electricity Board on 4.10.1982.
From these two applications, it is revealed that Mohinder Singh and the petitioner had four children at the time of death of Mohinder Singh, eldest of them being Ms. Sunita aged 10 years, son Sanjay 6 years, Devi daughter aged 4 years and son Sanjeev aged one year.
Sanjay passed matriculation examination in the year 1992 from the Haryana School Education Board and thereafter he submitted his application on 1391992 (Annexure P5) for appointment to the Secretary of the Board.
The petitioner also submitted a similar application to the Secretary of the Board on 14121992.
Repeated representations made by the petitioner and her son to be employed on compassionate grounds as per the policy of the Government failed to evoke any response from the Board and, therefore, the petitioner has filed this petition and has prayed for issue of a mandamus for appointment of her son on compassionate ground.
2.
The petition has been opposed by the respondents on the ground that no legal or constitutional right vests in the petitioner to get appointment of her son on compassionate grounds.
The respondents have pleaded that the petitioner has failed to act in accordance with the instructions dated 2731991 issued by the Board and, therefore, at this belated stage no direction should be given to the Board for giving employment to the son of late Mohinder Singh.
According to the respondents, the application alleged to have been submitted by the petitioner on 15 101982 was not received by the Executive Engineer concerned and that in the absence of any such request, it is not possible for the Board to entertain the application at such a belated stage.
The respondents have further averred that the application for appointment on compassionate grounds could be filed within the time limit specified in the instructions of the Board and as the petitioner failed to do so, no writ deserves to be issued in her favour or in favour of her son for appointment on compassionate grounds.
3.
It is an admitted fact that the Government of Haryana has issued policy instructions containing guidelines for providing employment to the dependents of the deceased employees.
The respondent-Board has also issued policy decisions vide circular dated 1491983, 2651985, 1101986 and 3111988.
According to the respondents, no request for employment on compassionate ground could be entertained until an application is made to that effect within one year of the death of an employee as per the instructions contained in circular dated 2651985.
This period was extended to three years vide circular dated 1101986.
4.
In her rejoinder, the petitioner has pleaded that at the time of death of her husband, she was unable to make any application for employment because her son was only 6/7 years old and she had in fact submitted letter dated 15.10.1982 for registration of the name of her son for appointment on compassionate ground.
Reliance has been placed by the petitioner on the decision of this Court in Chandro Devi v. State of Haryana and another, 1994(1) SCT 9 (P&H) : 1994(1) RSJ 229.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has also placed reliance on the decision in Ratni Devi v. Secretary, HSEB, 1987(2) P.L.R.
374.
By placing reliance on various other decisions of this Court, learned counsel for the petitioner argued that the failure of the widow to submit an application for appointment on compassionate ground within a period of three years cannot be made a ground for denial of employment on compassionate ground to one dependent of the deceased.
According to Shri Dua, in a case where the children of the deceased are minor, the imitation of filing of the application should be three years from the date of attaining the majority of the child and as petitioner's son attained majority only in the year 1992-93, the petitioner and her son were right in making an application to the Board for employment on compassionate ground.
Learned counsel appearing for the Board, on the other hand, submitted that although this Court has given direction for employment on compassionate ground, in view of the judgment of the Supreme Court in Umesh Kumar Nagpal v. State of Haryana, 1994(3) SCT 174 (SC) : JT 1994(3) SC 525, the application filed by the petitioner at a belated stage cannot be made the basis for giving employment to the son of late Mohinder Singh.
5.
In Ratni Devi's case (supra), a Division Bench of this Court was interpreting the instructions issued by the respondent-Board on 22101971 on the subject of employment on compassionate grounds and observed that one of the dependents of the deceased cannot be denied employment simply because another member of the family was already employed on some other post.
6.
In Chandro Devi's case (supra), this Court considered the plea of limitation of three years and rejected the same by making the following observations :-  "In so far as the plea of limitation is concerned, the same in the facts of the case has necessarily to be rejected.
There may be cases where an employee would die leaving infants behind him.
In such cases, there cannot be any occasion for making any application on compassionate grounds within three years.
It is natural that such people would acquire qualification and age for employment after doing some education which will obviously take long years from the time when their bread winner died.
The limitation of three years is to be construed in that light and cannot be made applicable in every case.
In other words, such a policy can be made applicable only where in the family of the deceased there are persons who can be employed.
In so far as the policy decision of the Government to give employment to one dependent of the deceased is concerned, the same has not been denied."
In Balkar Singh v. State of Haryana, CWP.
No. 3585 of 1993 decided on 481994, a Division Bench of this Court referred to another decision of this Court rendered in CWP No. 2463 of 1991 (Santosh Kumar v. HSEB, 1993(1) SCT 158 (P&H).)
decided on 2271992, wherein it was held that in the case of a minor the period of limitation cannot be operated from the date of death but should be invoked from the date of attaining majority.
The Division Bench held that principles of law laid down in the case of Santosh Kumar v. HSEB (supra) reflected the correct position.
7.
In CWP.
No. 4350 of 1994 decided on 441995, a Division Bench of this Court referred to earlier decisions and then observed as under :-  "In addition to what has been held by this Court in the two cases referred to above, we wish to add that though the object of giving employment to a dependent of the deceased employee is achieved if one of the family members of the deceased employee is given employment immediately after his death, but at the same time it has to be taken into consideration that appointment can be given to one member of the family of the deceased employee in accordance with the provisions of the relevant rules or executive instructions governing recruitment.
Neither in the service of the Haryana Government nor in the service of the respondent-Board a person below the age of 18 years can be given employment.
Therefore, if a deceased employee is survived by minors, it is impossible to give effect to the condition incorporated in the circulars of the Board dated 2691985 and 1101986, which requires submission of the application within three years of the death of the employee.
A condition which is impossible to be performed is ordinarily liable to be treated as arbitrary and unconstitutional but if such condition can be given a reasonable meaning so as to avoid the charge of unconstitutionality that interpretation has to be preferred.
Therefore, the instructions contained in the circulars dated 2691985 and 1101986 will have to be interpreted to mean that in case of a minor child the period of three years would be applicable from the date he becomes major.
This is the only possible way of giving effect to the policy of giving employment to the dependent of a deceased employee where his dependent happens to be minor children."
Then, in Hakim Singh v. HSEB and another, 1995(4) SCT 746 (P&H) : 1995 (5) SLR 274, once again a similar question was considered by me and it was held that in view of the consistent judgments of this Court holding that a minor dependent cannot be deprived of employment on compassionate ground only because he could not submit the application within three years of the death, the Board was not justified in denying employment to the petitioner and a mandamus was issued to consider the case of the petitioner for appointment on compassionate ground with a further direction that his case shall not be rejected on the ground of non-submission of application by his mother after the death of his father.
In Vishal Sharma v. Haryana State Electricity Board and another, 1995(4) SCT 801 (P&H) : 1995(5) S.L.R.
306 another Division Bench of this Court again reiterated the same principle.
The Division Bench considered the decision of the Supreme Court in Umesh Kumar v. State of Haryana (supra) and held that on the basis of that judgment, the relief cannot be denied to the petitioner.
8.
A careful reading of the judgment in Umesh Kumar's case (supra) shows that their Lordships of the Supreme Court have held that employment on compassionate grounds should be confined to Class III and Class IV posts.
Their Lordships further observed that the appointment on compassionate ground cannot be claimed as a matter of right.
It has also been observed that the Government and the public authority concerned has to examine the financial condition of the family of the deceased and only after satisfying that the family will not be able to meet the crisis other than by way of offer of job, then the employment can be given.
The Court further observed that the posts in Class III and Class IV are the lowest posts in ministerial and non- ministerial categories and hence they alone can be offered, the objective being to relieve the family of the financial difficulties and to help them in the emergency.
That judgment cannot be read as laying down as proposition of law that public employer can discriminate between the persons similarly situated.
In fact, their Lordships of the Supreme Court held that the employment cannot be granted after a lapse of reasonable period which must be specified in the rules.
This observation clearly indicates that if a period of limitation is prescribed in the rules, then, the employment can be given within that period.
That would necessarily mean that the dependent must be eligible for making an application within the period of limitation indicated in the rules.
Therefore, in the case of a minor who is not qualified to apply for the appointment on compassionate ground, the period of limitation cannot but start from the date of attaining his majority.
9.
In view of the above discussion, it must be held that son of the petitioner (Sanjay) who became major sometime in the years 1992-93 has a legitimate right to be considered for appointment on compassionate ground and his ineligibility to apply for appointment on compassionate ground cannot be made a ground for denial of relief to him.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to consider the case of the petitioner within three months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order and pass an appropriate order for giving employment to him on Class III or Class IV post commensurate with his qualifications.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.