Swatanter Kumar, J - This is a petition where the respondent had intentionally violated the direction issued by the Division Bench of this Court vide its order dated 3011995.
Vide this order Division Bench of this Court had directed the respondent to grant LTC within 15 days from the receipt of the copy of the order.
It is sad to note that the petitioner was not granted this concession in spite of the fact that the copy of the order was admittedly served upon the respondent on 831995.
The petitioner has been retired from service and consequently the relief granted to the petitioner became infructuous.
However, the petitioner kept on perusing the remedy and continued to request the respondent to grant LTC as per order of the Division Bench of this Court, but obviously of no avail.
2.
Reply originally filed by the respondent is most unsatisfactory and gives no other impression except that the respondent slept over the matter and had no bona fide intention to comply with the order of the Court.
The facts disclosed by the respondent in the additional affidavit dated 12101995 have persuaded the Court not to take stringent action of punishing the respondent for contempt of Court.
3.
Mr. NS Bhinder, DA Haryana upon instructions from Ms. Navraj Sandhu, Director Secondary Education, Haryana, Chandigarh who is also present in Court states that she for herself and on behalf of the employees of the Department tenders unconditional and unqualified apology for not complying with the order of the Court.
Learned Counsel further submits that the Director gives an undertaking to this Court that the wife of the petitioner who is employed in the same Department, would be given LTC which obviously includes the petitioner and the benefit of LTC to be provided to the wife of the petitioner would be for the status which the petitioner held while in office.
In the additional affidavit filed by the Director, it appears that the default has resulted because of some inaction on the part of some employees against whom departmental enquiry had been initiated.
It is for the reasons stated above and the intention on the part of the respondent now to comply with the order of the Court positively that has persuaded this Court to accept the apology and not to proceed further in the contempt proceedings against the said respondent because the paramount consideration before the Court in such proceedings is that the order passed by the Court should be complied with.
Of course, this is not as a matter of rule, there may be cases where the Court may have to take appropriate action against the condemner even if they undertook to comply with the order of the Court.
This would depend on the facts and circumstances of each case.
4.
The undertaking given by the Director in the Court is accepted.
The unconditional and unqualified apology tendered is also accepted.
The notice of contempt against the said respondent is dropped and the respondent is discharged.
5.
It has been submitted on behalf of the respondent that the wife of the petitioner should submit the papers within specified time.
Thus, it is directed that the wife of the petitioner shall submit the papers for availing the benefit of LTC in accordance with the undertaking given by the respondent to this Court within one month from today and the said application shall be considered by the respondent in accordance with rules within two weeks thereafter.
6.
Since the petitioner was compelled to file one petition after another for getting the order passed by the Division Bench of this Court complied with, it is a fit case where the respondents should be burdened with costs.
Consequently, the respondent shall pay a sum of Rs. 1,000/- to the petitioner as costs and the costs being conditional in the present case.
It is further directed that the costs awarded in the case would be paid by the Department.
That would ultimately be recovered from the salary of the defaulting officer/official against whom the departmental enquiry is stated to be pending.
7.
With the above observations, the petition stands disposed of.
Order accordingly.