RP Sethi, J - This judgment of ours shall dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 7784, 9610, 10480, 9628, 12264, 12265, 12266, 7616, 7617, 9957, 7754, 8085, 8183, 9088, 9067, 9867, 9870, 9073, 9089, 10198, 10199, 8096 and 10130 of 1995 as it has been conceded by the learned counsel appearing for the parties that the facts in all the petitions are almost identical and the question of law involved is common.
However, for the purposes of this judgment, the facts have been derived from C.P.W.
No. 7784 of 1955.
2.
The petitioners in all these writ petitions have been employed in the regular Department of the respondent-State on daily wage basis on the posts of Beldar, Peon, WPO, MCC, Mali-cum-Chowkidar, Helper, Fitters etc.
They have prayed for the grant of pay scale which is being paid to the regular employees of the respondent-State working on the same posts.
It is submitted that for the various establishment activities, the respondent-State need thousands of hands every day for which instead of appointing unemployed youth on regular basis, the practice of appointing persons on daily wage basis has been resorted to with the result that the persons like the petitioners, some of whom are continuously working for the periods ranging from 10 years to two years, have been deprived the benefit of payment of the salary which is being paid to their counter-parts on regular basis.
For instance, the petitioners have referred to the pay scale of Beldars and have submitted that when the regular employees holding such posts are entitled to the pay scale of Rs. 750-940, the petitioners working on the aforesaid post as daily wagers were getting only Rs. 700-800 per month.
It is submitted that the Beldars on regular pay scales do not get less than Rs. 2,000/- pm which includes the allowances permissible to such posts.
The petitioners have claimed of doing the same job with similar responsibilities and under similar working conditions in the same department.
It is further contended that the posts on which the petitioner as well as their regular counter-parts are working are inter-changeable and transferable.
The respondents have not maintained any seniority list of daily wagers.
Uncertainty is attached to their service career and they have been left at the mercy of the respondents.
The petitioners allege that they have been deprived of the protection of Industrial Disputes Act as is available to other similar situated persons.
It is claimed by the petitioner that under similar circumstances, the Apex Court and this Court have already issued directions to the respondents to grant the daily wagers the appropriate relief.
The Special Leave Petitions against the judgments of this Court are stated to have been dismissed.
3.
Reply has been filed only in Civil Writ Petition No. 8085 of 1995.
It has, however, been submitted by the learned counsel appearing for the State that as the facts in all these petitions are identical and the point of law is common, the written statement filed in Civil Writ Petition No. 8085 of 1995 be treated as the reply in all these writ petitions.
4.
In their reply, the respondents have submitted that as no fundamental or legal right of the petitioners was involved, the writ petitions were liable to the dismissed.
It is further submitted that the petitioners were trying to put a wrong interpretation on the judgment of the Supreme Court.
It is further submitted that in view of the judgment of this Court in Virender Singh Malik v. Haryana State Remote Sensing Application Centre, 1994(4) SCT 189(P&H) : 1995(1) R.S.J.
603, the present writ petitions were liable to be dismissed.
The fact that the petitioners were performing similar duties as were being performed by regular employees of the respondent-State has not been denied.
The only dispute projected by the respondents is regarding the disciplinary control over the daily wagers is distinguishable from the regular employees.
5.
The principle of equal pay for equal work as invoked by the petitioners has been held to be not abstract one and the State is entitled to prescribe different scales of pay having different rates having regard to the different nature of duties, responsibilities and educational qualifications but where the employees are equal in every respect including educational qualifications, duties, functions and measure of responsibilities, the doctrine of equal pay for equal work would be applicable, and if the Court is satisfied that the classification prescribing different scales of pay is not based on reasonable nexus, appropriate directions may be issued.
6.
The Supreme Court in Randhir Singh v. Union of India, AIR 1982 SC 879 held that even though the principle of equal pay for equal work is not expressly declared by the Constitution to be a fundamental right yet it was certainly a constitutional goal.
The Supreme Court referred to Article 39(d) of the Constitution and held that :-  "...'Equal pay for equal work for both men and women' means equal pay for equal work for everyone and as between the sexes.
Directive Principles, as has been pointed out in some of the judgments of this Court, have to be read into the fundamental rights as a matter of interpretation.
Article 14 of the Constitution enjoins the State not to deny any person equality before the law or the equal protection of the laws and Article 16 declares that there shall be equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters relating to employment or appointments to any office under the State.
These equality clauses of the Constitution must mean something to everyone.
To the vast majority of the people the equality clauses of the Constitution would mean nothing if they are unconcerned with the work they do and the pay they get.
To them the equality clauses will have some substance if equal work means equal pay."
7.
Referring the preamble of the Constitution, the Court held :-  "........
The preamble to the Constitution declares the solemn resolution of the people of India to constitute India into a sovereign Socialist Democratic Republic.
Again the word 'Socialist' must mean something.
Even if it does not mean to mean 'Equal pay for equal work, the principle of 'Equal pay for equal work' is expressly recognized by all socialist systems of law, e.g.
Section 59 of the Hungarian Labour Code, Para 2 of Section 111 of the Czechoslovakia Code, Section 67 of the Bulgarian Code, Section 40 of the Code of the German Democratic Republic, para 2 of Section 33 of the Rumanian Code.
Indeed this principle has been incorporated in several western labour codes too.
Under provisions in Section 31(g. No. 2d) of Book 1 of the French Code du Travail, and according to Argentinian law, this principle must be applied to female workers in all collective bargaining agreements.
In accordance with Section 3 of the Grudgestz of the German Federal Republic, the clause 7, Section 123 of the Mexican Constitution, the principle is given universal significance (vide : International Labour Law by Istvan Szaszy P 265).
The preamble of the Constitution of the International Labour Organisation recognises the principle of 'equal remuneration for work of equal value' as constituting one of the means of achieving the improvement of conditions "involving such injustice, hardship and privation to large number of people as to produce unrest so great that the peace and harmony of the word are imperiled."
Construing Articles 14 and 16 in the light of the preamble and Article 39(4), we are of the view that the principle "Equal Pay for Equal Work" is deducible from those Articles and may be properly applied to cases of unequal scales of pay based on no classification or irrational classification though those drawing the different scales of pay do identical work under the same employer."
The principle of 'Equal pay for equal work' was further enunciated and approved by the Supreme Court in P Savita v.
U.O.I., AIR 1985 SC 1124; Dhirindra Champli v. State of UP, 1986(1) SCC 637; Surinder Singh v. Engineer-in-Chief, AIR 1986 SC 594; Bhagwan Dass v. State of Haryana, AIR 1987 SC 2049; Jaipal v. State of Haryana, AIR 1988 SC 1504; V Markendeya v. State of Andhra Pradesh, AIR 1989 SC 1308; State of UP v. JP Chaurasia, AIR 1989 SC 19 and host of other authorities.
8.
After referring to its various earlier judgments, the Supreme Court in Grih Kalyan Kendra Workers Union v. Union of India, 1991(2) SCT 95 (SC) : AIR 1991 SC 1173 held :  "...Equal pay for equal work is not expressly declared by the Constitution as fundamental right but in view of the Directive Principles of State Policy as contained in Article 39(d) of the Constitution "Equal pay for equal work" has assumed the status of fundamental right in service jurisprudence having regard to the constitutional mandate of equality in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Equal pay for equal work and providing security for service by the regularising casual employment within a reasonable period has been accepted by this Court as a constitutional goal to our socialist pattern.
It has ceased to be a judge made law as it is the part of the constitutional philosophy which ensures a welfare socialistic pattern of a State providing equal opportunity to all and equal pay for equal work for similarly placed employees of the State.
This Court has zealously enforced the fundamental right of equal pay for equal work in effectuating the constitutional goal of equality and social justice in a member of decisions."
In this case, the Supreme Court further held that the principle of equal pay for equal work was applicable in its full vigour even in establishments which were not a regular department of the State but were instrumentality of the State.
The Court further held that while considering the principle of equal pay for equal work it was not necessary to find out the similarities by mathematical formula.
Reasonable similarity in the nature of work, performance of duties, qualifications and quality of work was sufficient.
9.
This Court has already is various cases directed the respondents to pay to the petitioners therein the same salary and allowances as were being paid to the regular employees holding similar posts w.e.f.
the dates of their employment on the posts held by them.
Despite the facts that directions were issued in the matter pertaining to the respondent-State, the appropriate relief was not granted to the petitioners forcing them to approach this Court by way of the present writ petitions.
It would have been in the interest of State as also the daily wage employees if the State would have granted them the relief on the basis of the directions already issued with respect to the daily wage employees, employed in the P.W.D.
of the respondent-State.
10.
Reliance of the learned counsel for the State on Virender Singh Malik's case (supra) is of no help to him.
In that case, the Court was dealing with the case of a person who had worked only for six months against the post of a Draftsman required for area calculation and allied work for the urban land use mapping of a project.
The Court also appears to have been influenced by the fact that after the expiry of period of six months another persons had been appointed in place of the petitioner therein.
The Court referred to the judgment of the Supreme Court in State of Madhya Pradesh v. Parmod Bhartiya, 1993(1) SCT 138(SC) : 1993(1) R.S.J.
618 and on facts concluded, by no stretch of imagination, his duty and responsibility can be equated with those Draftsmen who were employed on regular basis.
The Court, however, rightly approved the judgments of the Supreme Court in Karam Singh v. State of J & K, AIR 1986 SC 584; Bhagwan Dass v. State of Haryana, AIR 1987 SC 2048 and various other judgments on the subject.
11.
In Virender Singh Malik's case (supra), this Court had relied upon the judgment of the Supreme Court in Parmod Bhartiya's case (supra) wherein the Supreme Court had reiterated its earlier judgment and had held that the problem about equal pay cannot always be translated into a mathematical formula.
If it had a rational nexus with the object sought for, the authorities and the Court would not interfere.
However, as and when it is demonstrated that the action was irrational or based on no basis or arrived malafide either in law or in fact, the Court would definitely intervene and grant to the persons the appropriate relief.
Otherwise also, in view of the aforesaid judgment of the Supreme Court it cannot be said that the relief of equal pay for equal work can be denied to the ad hoc or daily wage employees merely on the ground of their not being subjected to service rules or disciplinary control like the regular employees.
The facts of the present cases are quite distinguishable from the facts of that case.
The reliance of the learned counsel on Virender Singh Malik's case (supra) is, therefore, misplaced.
The learned counsel for the respondents has half-heartedily argued that instead of granting the equal pay with effect from the date of employment of the petitioners, they be granted such relief either from the date of filing of the writ petitions or at the most for a period of three years only.
We are not impressed with this argument in view of the directions of the Supreme Court referred to hereinabove and various other judgments of this Court already pronounced.
Even otherwise, it does not lie in the mouth of the respondents to make such a prayer inasmuch as they have themselves been granting the relief of equal pay for equal work to some of the employees with effect from the date of their employment and not from any later date.
The learned counsel for the petitioners has drawn our attention to Memo No. 4468-97 dated 1251995 issued by the Executive Engineer, Public Health Division No. II, Kaithal by which the persons mentioned therein were granted the salary and allowances as were being paid to the other regular employees holding similar posts with effect from the dates the persons therein were engaged on the posts held by them.
12.
Under these circumstances, all the writ petitions are allowed with a direction to the respondents to pay to the petitioners the same salary and allowances as are being paid to the regular employees holding similar posts with effect from the dates petitioners were employed on the posts held by them.
It would be appreciated that if similar directions are issued with respect to those employees who have not so far approached the Court but under the judgments, referred to hereinabove, are entitled to the grant of such relief.
A copy of this judgment be supplied to the learned State Counsel who may send the same to the Chief Secretary of the Haryana State for taking appropriate action in the matter in accordance with the directions given hereinabove and the observations made in this judgment.
No costs.
Petitions allowed.