NK Kapoor, J - This is defendant's regular second appeal against the judgment and decree of the Additional District Judge whereby appeal filed by the plaintiff was accepted thereby decreeing his suit.
2.
Plaintiff filed a suit for declaration to the effect that order of dismissal dated 1761978 passed by Principal Industrial, Training Institute, dismissing him from service is illegal, null, void, in-operative, non-existent and against the service conditions of the plaintiff and also against the rules of natural justice, equity and good conscience with a consequential relief that the plaintiff is entitled to all the benefits of service including pay and allowances as admissible from time to time according to the Rules and is eligible for promotion as if no order of dismissal has been passed.
3.
Suit was contested by the defendant.
It was pleaded that plaintiff had been convicted under Section 326 IPC by the Judicial Magistrate which conviction was upheld in appeal by the Additional Sessions Judge as well.
He was sentenced to imprisonment for 10/15 days and directed to pay a fine of Rs. 300/-.
Thus, there was no need to hold a regular enquiry against the plaintiff as is provided in the Rule 13 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970.
Other material averments made by the plaintiff were also controverted.
4.
On the pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed :-  (1) Whether the suit is bad for non-joinder of necessary parties as alleged ?
OPD.
(2) Whether the suit is within time ?
OPP.
(3) Whether a valid notice U/S 80 CPC has been served by the plaintiff on the defendant ?
OPP.
(4) Whether the impugned order dated 1761978 is illegal, null, void, in-operative, non-existent and against the service condition of the plaintiff against the rules of natural justice, equity and whether the plaintiff is entitled to the benefit of service as alleged ?
OPP.
(5).
Relief.
Issue No. 1 was decided in favour of the defendant and against the plaintiff.
Issue No. 2 was decided in favour of the plaintiff.
Under issue No. 3 it was held that notice has been properly served upon the defendant.
5.
Under the material issue - issue No. 4 the trial Court came to the conclusion that the punishment on the plaintiff was inflicted not merely on the factum of his conviction but also as a result of his conduct leading to his conviction.
So prima-facie the impugned order, Exhibit D-3, meets the requirement of law.
So the suit of the plaintiff was dismissed.
6.
The lower appellate Court on reconsidering the matter found substance in the contention raised by the appellant and so accepted the appeal thereby decreeing the suit of the plaintiff as prayed for.
The lower appellate Court placed reliance upon the decision in Om Parkash v. The Director, Postal Services (Posts and Telegraphs Deptt.)
Punjab Circle, Ambala and others, AIR 1973 P&H 1, wherein 13 guiding principles had been enunciated in connection with the matter of imposition of sentence on a government employee convicted by a Court of competent jurisdiction.
As per the Full Bench decision of this Court it has been held that the departmental punishment of removal or dismissal is not an essential or automatic consequence of conviction on a criminal charge and that the authority competent to pass order of punishment has to apply its mind and consider all the circumstances of the case and then to decide about the punishment as to whether any punishment is to be awarded and if so whether it is to be major or minor etc.  7.
It is the case of the appellant that the lower appellate Court has erred in up-setting the well considered judgment of the trial Court and that too for not valid reason.
According to the counsel, on the conviction of the respondent the punishing authority applied its mind and thereafter passed a dismissal order.
Such a order cannot be said to be a case of non- applicability of mind.
So the impugned judgment of the Court below deserves to be set aside.
According to the counsel, the suit as filed by the plaintiff was beyond the period of limitation i.e. cause of action had accrued to the plaintiff on 1761978 whereas present suit had been filed on 16.7.1981 i.e. after the expiry of 3 years.
This way the Court has mis- calculated the period.
The learned counsel for the respondent, however, argued that the judgment of the Additional District Judge is in conformity with the view expressed in the Full Bench judgment in Om Prakash's case (supra).
Elaborating, the counsel urged that plaintiff is a Peon who was service for almost 9 years when unfortunately had been dragged in a despute at his village.
No doubt he had been convicted by the Magistrate but in appeal the Additional District Judge while upholding the conviction reduced the sentence of imprisonment to the already undergone.
According to the counsel, before passing the extreme punishment of dismissal from service it was incumbent upon the punishing authority to examine the matter independently of the conviction by a criminal Court.
Punishing authority was expected to determine whether the conduct of the person which has led to his conviction is such as to render his further retention in government service as undesirable.
This point has been considered by the punishing authority.
Punishing authority has in a mechanical manner : followed the direction given by the Director of Education and Industrial Training vide letter exhibit D-1 dated 651978.
This way there has been no applicability of mind by the punishing authority which is violative of the Full Bench decision of this Court.
8.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties as well as perused the judgments of the Courts below.
Broad facts have already been noticed.
The plaintiff had been working as a Peon for almost about 9 years when he had been convicted by the Magistrate under Section 3426 IPC.
The Additional District Judge maintained the conviction but reduced the sentence to the already undergone.
The punishing authority as per direction of a superior dismissed the petitioner from service.
A bare perusal of Exhibit D-3, D-4 makes it abundantly clear that there has been no applicability of mind nor there is any finding to the effect that the conduct of the plaintiff is such as retaining him in service will prove injurious/harmful.
Authorities have also not considered as to whether any lesser punishment could be awarded in the circumstances of the present case.
The Full Bench judgment in Om Prakash's case (supra) has held as under :-  "(i) the departmental punishment of removal or dismissal from Government service is not an essential and automatic consequence of conviction on a criminal charge; (ii) the authority competent to take disciplinary action under Rule 19(1) of the 1965 Rules against a Central Government servant convicted on a criminal charge has to consider all the circumstances of the case and then to decide (a) whether the conduct of the delinquent official which led to his conviction in such as to render his further retention in public service undesirable; (b) if so, whether to dismiss him or to remove him from service, or to compulsorily retire him; and (c) if the said conduct of the official is not such which renders his further retention in service undesirable, whether the minor punishment, if any, should be inflicted on him".
9.
With regard to the plea of limitation trial Court rightly took note of the fact that civil Court remained closed on account of summer vacations from 1661981 to 1571981 as also the period of notice under Section 80 CPC ie two months time.
The plaintiff of course can exclude this period and so examined the suit was filed within limitation.
Thus, I find no merit in any of the contentions raised by the appellant and so affirm the finding of the lower appellate Court.
Consequently, the appeal is dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.