NK Kapoor, J - This is unsuccessful plaintiff's regular second appeal.
2.
The plaintiff, an ex-serviceman, was appointed as a Clerk in the grade of Rs. 110-250 plus usual allowances by the Deputy Commissioner, Sangrur, as recommended by the Employment Exchange on ad hoc basis vide office order dated 16.11.1972.
He continued in service upto 381978 and his service was extended from time to time with only notional breaks.
The plaintiff's services were terminated vide order dated 381978 which led to the filing of the present suit to the effect that the impugned order dated 381978 is illegal, void and not binding upon the plaintiff and that he continues to be a regular Clerk in the office of Deputy Commissioner, Sangrur, with a further prayer that he is entitled to all the pay, allowances including increments and other benefits accruing to him.
3.
The defendant-State of Punjab - contested the suit.
It was admitted that the plaintiff was appointed as a Clerk on ad hoc basis and was eligible for being regularised in accordance with the terms and conditions laid down in the Presidential Order dated 351977 but it was maintained that his services could not be regularised as his conduct was not found to be satisfactory as per report of the S.D.O.
(Civil), Sunam dated 2171978.
Deputy Commissioner, Sangrur, on the basis of the report of the S.D.O.
(Civil), Sunam terminated the services of the plaintiff vide order dated 381978.
It was denied that the impugned order suffers from any of the illegality or infirmity as set up by the plaintiff.
Other objections as to the notice u/s 80 of the Code of Civil Procedure being not valid; suit not maintained in the present form and that the same was barred by limitation were taken.
In addition thereto, it was stated that the plaintiff earlier filed a civil writ petition No. 3553 of 1979 which was dismissed in limine on 5121980.
4.
On the pleadings of the parties, following issues were framed :-  1.
Whether the order dated 381978 passed by the DC Sangrur, is illegal, void and not binding upon plaintiff ?
OPP 2.
Whether the plaintiff will be considered as a regular clerk in the office of DC Sangrur, and is entitled to all the pay, allowances and other benefits attached to the post from 381978 irrespective of the aforesaid order ?
OPP 3.
Whether the suit is not maintainable in the present form ?
OPD 4.
Whether the suit is barred by limitation ?
OPD 5.
Whether the notice u/s 80 CPC is invalid ?
OPD 6.
Whether the plaintiff has no locus standi to file the present suit ?
OPD 7.
Relief.
The trial Court decided both the material issues, issue Nos. 1 and 2, against the plaintiff.
Issues No. 3 to 6 were adjudged against the defendant.
In view of the findings given by the trial Court on issues No. 1 and 2, the suit of the plaintiff was dismissed.
5.
The lower appellate Court once again examined the matter on facts as well as on law.
It was urged by the learned counsel for the appellant-plaintiff that the plaintiff having rendered almost five years of service without any blemish was to be regularised in terms of the Presidential Order dated 351977.
Assailing the order of termination, it was urged by the learned counsel for the appellant that the Deputy Commissioner, Sangrur, gravely erred in law in relying upon the report of S.D.O.
(Civil), Sunam to disentitle the plaintiff of his right to be regularised in terms of the Presidential Order.
In fact, there was no occasion for calling the report from a person who long back ceased to be a superior of the plaintiff.
Even otherwise, such a report could not be made the basis to terminate the services of the plaintiff when his immediate superior had found his services to be satisfactory.
The lower appellate Court, however, did not find much merit in the submission of the learned counsel for the appellant and so affirmed the finding of the trial Court thereby dismissing the appeal.
6.
Learned counsel for the appellant has argued that the Courts below have erred in law in not setting aside the wholly illegal order passed by the Deputy Commissioner, Sangrur.
According to the counsel, no material has been adduced in evidence by the defendant to prove that the service record of the plaintiff was not satisfactory or his conduct was in any manner unsatisfactory.
At no given time, any such remark was ever conveyed during the five years of his unblemished service.
Since a valuable right has accrued to the plaintiff on the basis of Presidential Order i.e. right to be regularised to the post, the order of termination was per se mala fide and also otherwise violative of Article 311 of the Constitution of India and so deserves to be set aside.
7.
Learned Assistant Advocate General, Punjab, once again relied upon the report of the S.D.O.
(Civil), Sunam, where the officer had opined that the conduct of the plaintiff had not been found to be satisfactory and as the plaintiff did not fulfil condition No. 4 of the Presidential Order, the Deputy Commissioner rightly ordered termination of his services.
In any case, since the plaintiff was an ad hoc employee, his services could be terminated in view of the appointment letter without assigning any reason.
Accordingly, the decision of the Courts below is perfectly legal and so the appeal deserves to be dismissed.
8.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties, perused the impugned judgments of the Courts below as well as the relevant documents referred to by the respective counsel during the course of their submissions.
Broad facts are not in dispute i.e. the plaintiff's name was recommended by the Employment Exchange and taken in service by the Deputy Commissioner, Sangrur, vide order dated 16.11.1972 and his services continued to be extended from time to time with only notional breaks till the order of termination dated 381978.
The confidential report of the plaintiff has not been placed on record by the defendant upto the period ending 3131977.
May be, no confidential report had been recorded during this period.
Deputy Commissioner, Sangrur, called for the report of the S.D.O.
(Civil), Malerkotla, vide letter dated 3.5.1978 (Exhibit P-6).
As the S.D.O.
(Civil) Malerkotla declined to give any report vide letter dated 3051978 (Exhibit P-7) on the ground that he had no occasion to watch his conduct for a considerable long time.
Vide a special report dated 3.12.1977, S.D.O.
(Civil), Malerkotla informed the Deputy Commissioner that the work of the plaintiff was by and large satisfactory.
It is thereafter that the Deputy Commissioner sent a communication to the S.D.O.
(Civil), Sunam who was earlier posted as S.D.O.
(Civil), Malerkotla to furnish his comments with regard to the work and conduct of the plaintiff who vide letter dated 2171978 (Exhibit P-5) reported that his work was considered satisfactory but his conduct was not satisfactory.
It is on the basis of this letter that the services of the plaintiff were terminated on 381978.
Except for this bald comment which does not find recorded in his service-book, there is no other material on the record to show that his conduct was unsatisfactory.
9.
Presidential Order 351977 was passed with a view to regularise the services of ad hoc employees provided they fulfil the following conditions.
These are :  "(1) The ad hoc employees of the category referred to above must have completed a minimum of one year's service on the 31st March, 1977.
While calculating the period of service, the following type of breaks in service rendered on ad hoc basis may be ignored :-  (i) Where the break was of notional nature falling between ad hoc appointments in the same category of posts in the same Department.
(ii) Where the break was on account of some administrative conditions, such as the summer vacations during which the service of teachers are terminated so as to avoid the liability of payment for the said period.
In other words the breaks in ad hoc service would not be ignored in cases where :-  (i) the employee concerned left service of his own volition whether to join some other department or for some other reasons; or (ii) the ad hoc appointment was against a post/vacancy for which no regular recruitment was intended/required to be made, e.g. leave arrangements or filling of other short term vacancies.
(2) They fulfil the academic qualifications including experience, if any prescribed for the job/post, including the condition of age at the time of their first appointment as such;  (3) Their names had been recommended for such appointment by the Employment Exchanges or their applications had been received in response to the advertisements made for filling such posts; (4) Their work and conduct has been satisfactory.
(5) A regular post/vacancy is available for regularisation; and (6) Notional break up to a period of one month may be condoned."
Vide condition No. 3(1) an ad hoc employee who completed a minimum of one year's service on the 31st March, 1977 could be considered for regularisation.
Thus, it is to be seen whether the work and conduct of the appellant is satisfactory upto 3131977 and not further.
As noticed in the earlier part of the judgment, even communication sent by the S.D.O.
(Civil) Sunam (not a superior of the appellant-plaintiff when such communication was addressed to the Deputy Commissioner, Sangrur) on 2171978 could not be made basis to deprive a person of his valuable right to be regularised to the post which he held without any blemish during almost for a period of five years.
Much emphasis has been laid by the learned Assistant Advocate General on condition No. (4) that the work and conduct is to be proved to be satisfactory before service could be regularised.
The appellant-plaintiff, admittedly, fulfilled this condition upto 3131977 especially when no such adverse report or comments have ever been communicated to the plaintiff nor the same finds recorded in the service record.
It is only in pursuance to a communication received from the Deputy Commissioner, Sangrur, that the S.D.O.
(Civil), Sunam sent his comments stating that whereas the service record of the plaintiff was satisfactory but his conduct was not satisfactory.
Any subsequent assessment by an officer who long back ceased to be incharge of the person, ought not to have made basis to deprive him of the beneficiary intendment of the Presidential Order dated 351977.
The order of the Deputy Commissioner, Sangrur, terminating the services of the appellant is not only illegal but mala fide as well and so deserves to be quashed without any hesitation.
10.
The lower appellate Court despite having referred to a decision of the Division Bench of this Court in case reported as Smt. Prem Lata v. The State of Punjab, etc. 1978 CLJ (Civil) 367 which applies to the facts of the present case; somehow declined to place reliance upon the same and for no valid reason.
Just to by-pass the Division Bench judgment, the lower appellate Court has chosen to state that since the plaintiff has not been able to prove that his work and conduct was satisfactory upto 3131977, so no benefit can be given on the basis of this judgment.
Was plaintiff to lead evidence with regard to quality of his work and conduct ?
The lower appellate Court has miserably failed to apply even the elementary principles of evidence with regard to onus and proof of a fact.
Regretably, the approach of the lower appellate Court is indeed perverse.
Whether the work and conduct of the appellant-plaintiff is satisfactory was within the knowledge of the department which, in fact, has failed to place on record any worthwhile material in support of their contention except the report got from the S.D.O.
(Civil), Sunam on a later date on 381978 (after 3171977).
The Division Bench judgment applies to the facts of this case.
Accordingly, I accept this appeal, set aside the judgment and decree of the Courts below and decree the suit of the plaintiff as prayed for with costs.
Appeal accepted.