THB Chalapathi, J - Punjabi University, Patiala advertised certain posts of Clerks/Clerks-cum-Typists on 19111991.
25% posts were reserved for Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes and 5% posts were reserved for Backward Classes and the selection had to be made on the basis of written test/type test and interview.
The qualifications prescribed in the advertisement for the said posts is Matric/Higher Secondary Ist Division or 10 plus 2 Second Division or Graduate, with typewriting speed of 30 words per minute in Punjabi.
Thus a person having passed Matric/Higher Secondary with Ist Division or 10 plus 2 with Second Division or Graduate is eligible for appointment.
About 2700 candidates, including the petitioners, applied for the said posts.
Out of the said 2700 candidates appeared, only 50 candidates passed the type test.
Thereafter interview was fixed for 851993 but the University postponed the interview without fixing any further date.
In their letter dated 3041993 it is stated that the new date for interview would be intimated later to the candidates.
Thereafter, the Ist petitioner filed a writ petition in this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 12093 of 1994 for a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to hold the interview for the posts and prepare the panel for appointment to the posts of Clerks/Clerks-cum-Typist.
The said writ petition was allowed directing the University to hold an interview of the candidates including the petitioners therein who had passed the written and typing test within one month from the date of the order i.e. 24101994.
In compliance with the said order of this Court, interviews were held on 22111994 and the petitioners who passed the test appeared for the interview and the Selection Committee consisting of the Registrar, Deputy Registrar and 2/3 other members held the interview and finalised the select list and recommended the same to the Vice-Chancellor for appointments.
Before approval of the select list, the Registrar of the University retired on 31121994 and another Registrar namely Raghubir Singh joined.
Thereafter, the said Registrar who is the 3rd respondent again fixed the date of interview by calling only those candidates who have passed the Matriculation examination with Ist Division and the other candidates who passed their Higher Secondary in Ist Division or 10 plus 2 in Second Division or Graduates are not called for interview.
The date of interview was fixed for 621995.
This procedure was adopted by the 3rd respondent to accommodate his own candidates for the post of Clerk/Clerk-cum-Typist.
The petitioners approached this Court challenging the fresh interview which was fixed for 621995.
According to the petitioners, the interview was held on 22111994 in accordance with the orders of this Court cannot be set at naught.
The action of the respondent by fixing a fresh date of interview on 621995 is illegal and in contravention of the orders of this Court.
According to the petitioners, they passed the written and typing test and were interviewed on 22111994 and they were selected and ignoring their claims the second interview was fixed even without calling the petitioners for interview fixed on 621995.
According to the petitioners they possess the requisite qualification and completed all the formalities to the post of Clerk/Clerk-cum-Typist.
Therefore, the petitioners prayed for issuance of a writ of certiorari quashing the interview fixed for 621995 and direct the respondents to make appointment to the post of Clerk/Clerk-cum-Typist on the basis of selection list prepared in pursuance of the interview held on 22111994.
2.
Respondents 1 and 2 filed a written statement contending inter alia as follows :  3.
According to the respondents about 1700 candidates appeared in the written test on 8111992 in pursuance of the advertisement issued in November, 1991 for filling up the posts and the candidates who were successful in the written test were called for typing test and those who cleared the type test were called for interview.
According to the respondents, the criteria for selection is that the candidates who secured 50% marks in the general category and 40% marks in the case of reserved category of Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe and Backward Classes in the written test were to be called for interview and it was also necessary that the candidate must pass the type test with a minimum speed of 30 words per minute.
The said criteria for selection was formulated after due consideration by the Vice-Chancellor.
It is further stated that in pursuance of the decision of this Court dated 24101994 in CWP No. 12093 of 1994 the interviews were held on 22111994 and the petitioners appeared in the interview on the said date.
It is further averred that on examination of the list of candidates selected it was found that the persons who were not eligible to be called for interview in view of the fact that they did not secure the qualifying marks in the written/type test, had been called for interview.
It was also found that the candidates belonging to the categories of Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe who had secured more than the qualifying marks but were less than 50% marks for the general category had been excluded from interview.
Thus injustice was about to be perpetuated against candidate gross who had secured more than the qualifying marks, have not been called for interview.
Therefore, the result of the interview conducted on 22111994 was not declared.
According to the respondents, all the eligible candidates have now been again called for interview to be held on 1421995.
Petitioners 1, 2, 3 and 5 have again been called for interview as they all have secured over 50% marks in the written test and have also passed the typing test.
According to the respondents, petitioners 4 and 7 have not secured the qualifying marks and petitioner No. 6 on the last date of applications was matric IInd Class and did not have 10 plus 2 or Graduate.
Thus in order to do justice, among all the successful candidates, the University called for fresh interview.
It is also averred that petitioner made a false statement that those candidates who have passed Matriculation with Ist Division had been called for interview and those who passed Higher Secondary, 10 plus 2 or Graduation, have been left out.
For the mis-statement of facts, the writ petition is liable to be dismissed.
4.
The petitioners cannot be directed to be appointed.
The petitioners have a right only to be considered if they are eligible for the posts.
According to the respondents, 1 and 2, 3 and 5 were eligible to be called for interview and they have been called for interview even on 621995.
It is further stated that the interviews held on 22111994 were not in accordance with the criteria laid down by the University and therefore, fresh interview was sought to be held.
5.
In the rejoinder filed by the petitioners, it is asserted that the interview was held on 22111994 as per direction of this Court and a list of selected candidates had been prepared and sent to the Vice-Chancellor by the then Registrar Shri Tirath Singh.
Therefore, the process of selection has been completed and the only thing remained, is the approval of the list and issuing of letters of appointment.
It is further stated that there are candidates in the general category who secured 495% marks have been called for interview and the University has taken a decision that those candidates who secured 495% marks and above had been called for interview held on 22111994.
It is further averred that if some eligible Scheduled Caste candidates were not called for interview then re-interview must be confined only to those Scheduled Caste candidates who secured qualifying marks.
The petitioners have not misstated any facts.
It is further averred that the 6th petitioner is eligible for interview and there are seven persons who are Matriculate IInd Division applied for the posts and those seven persons are in the service of University as daily wagers since 1989.
Therefore, the Vice-Chancellor took a decision to allow these seven persons to participate in the selection process and the qualification was relaxed in their favour and out of those 7 persons 6 persons could not clear the written test.
It is further averred that the 6th petitioner passed his Graduation in September and therefore is eligible as per Advertisement in any case.
It is further averred that the earlier interview was scrapped for extraneous reasons.
Thereafter, it is prayed that the writ petition be allowed.
6.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length and perused the record carefully.
7.
There is no dispute that the University advertised certain posts of Clerks/Clerk-cum-Typists to be filled up.
Written and typing tests were held and the University fixed 8.5.1994 as the date for interviews of the candidates but later the interviews were postponed without fixing any date.
Therefore, the 1st petitioner was compelled to approach this Court for a direction to the University to hold the interviews.
The interviews were held on 22111994 in pursuance of the direction of this Court given in CWP No. 12093 of 1994, decided on 24101994.
A Selection Committee consisting of the Registrar, Deputy Registrar and 2/3 other members interviewed the candidates on 22111994 and prepared the selection list and recommended the same to the Vice-Chancellor for appointment.
Admittedly the University has not acted upon the said select list but fixed 621995 as the date for fresh interviews of the candidates.
The reason given by the University for not acting upon the interviews held on 22111994 and fixing a fresh interview on 621995 is that some unqualified persons had been called for interview held on 22111994 and some eligible candidates among the Scheduled Caste candidates had been omitted from being called for interview.
Therefore, according to the University, the select list prepared in pursuance of the interviews held on 22111994 cannot be acted upon as the same was a result of the irregularities committed during the process of selection that necessitated, according to the University, calling for fresh interviews.
The alleged irregularities committed during the process of selection preceding the interview held on 22111994, can be summarised as follows :  (i) Persons who did not possess the necessary qualifications as per the advertisement, were called for interview only on the basis that they passed the written test.
According to the petitioner, the Vice-Chancellor relaxed the qualifications.
(ii) Persons who did not secure 50% marks in the test have been called for interviews.
According to the petitioners, the Vice-Chancellor took a decision that those persons who secured 495% marks can be considered as secured 50% marks rounding off the marks/fraction and therefore, there is no illegality in calling such candidates, who secured 495% marks and not less than 50% marks for interviews.
(iii) The candidates belonging to the Scheduled Caste and Backward Class who secured more than 50% marks were called for interview towards general category candidates and the same vitiated the selection process.
Even the writ petitioners in their rejoinder admitted that if any candidate belonging to Scheduled Caste/Backward Class had been omitted from being called for interview, held on 22111994, the fresh interview can be confined only to those who have not been interviewed on 22111994.
The qualifications prescribed for appointment to the post of Clerk/Clerk-cum-Typist are as follows :-  "Candidate should be either : Matric/Higher Secondary Ist Division or Graduate with typing speed of 30 W.P.M.
in Punjabi.
Persons possessing the above qualifications who have more than 5 years' clerical experience in a University/College/Government Office/Public Undertaking/Autonomous Organisation could, however, be considered for exemption from passing type-test OR Matric/Higher Secondary 2nd Division with 4 years' clerical experience in a University/Government Office/Public Undertaking/Autonomous Organisation and with a typing speed of 30 W.P.M.
in Punjabi.
OR Matric/Higher Secondary 2nd Division with typing speed 40 W.P.M.
in Punjabi.
Knowledge of typewriting in English will be considered as an additional qualification.
In all cases, candidates must have passed Punjabi as one of the subjects in Matric or in a higher course."
8.
Therefore, a person having Matric Ist Division or Higher Secondary Ist Division alone is eligible for appointment.
A person with Matric/Higher Secondary 2nd Division with 4 years' clerical experience is also eligible or a person Matric or Higher Secondary with 2nd Division having typing speed of 30 of W.P.M.
in Punjabi is also made eligible in the above rules.
These rules cannot be relaxed by the Vice-Chancellor either in the case of fresh candidates or in the case of persons appointed temporarily or on ad hoc basis in the University.
It is the case of the petitioners that seven persons with Matric 2nd Division were already working in the University and that the Vice-Chancellor permitted them to compete for the post as they are in the service of the University on ad hoc basis but admittedly they did not complete 4 years' service against the posts advertised.
No rule has been brought to our notice which empowers the Vice-Chancellor to relax the qualifications.
No authority shall have the power to relax the qualifications unless the rules provide for exercise of such power.
Even if there is any power of relaxation, the power has to be exercised only by the authority competent to relax under the rule which empowers to relax.
In this context, it is useful to refer to the decision of the Supreme Court in Yogendra Pal Singh and others v. Union of India and others, reported in 1988(1) S.L.J.
7, wherein it was observed as follows :-  "Under rule 30 of the Rules any relaxation should be made by the Administrator (Lt.
Governor of the Union Territory of Delhi) and not by the Deputy Commissioner of Police.
Thus no reliance can be placed on the order of relaxation passed by the Deputy Commissioner of Police on 3101981."
9.
From the above decision of the apex Court it is clear that the power of relaxation must be provided in the rules and it can be exercised only by the authority which is empowered by the rules to relax.
We are therefore, of the opinion that the Vice-Chancellor has no power to relax the qualifications as there is no such rule or resolution of the Syndicate empowering the Vice- Chancellor to relax any qualifications.
10.
Further the advertisement inviting applications for filling up the posts does not give out that there is no rigidity in the matter of qualifications required of a candidate for the post.
It is not given out in the advertisement that there would be relaxation of the educational qualifications or experience.
So long as the advertisement does not give any indication that the University would relax the condition of minimum qualifications, there is no opportunity for those may not have the minimum qualifications to compete at all.
Since it is not permissible for the appointing authority to condone or relax any of the conditions to the detriment of equal opportunity being made available to other candidates whose cases for similar condonation or relaxation could not be considered by the University for want of proper advertisement.
Equality of opportunity will be determined for the purpose of Article 16 of the Constitution by the representation made in the advertisement calling for the applications for filling up a post.
The advertisement in the present case nowhere suggests that the educational qualifications namely Matriculation with Ist Division mentioned under the head 'qualifications' for the post of Clerk/Clerk-cum- Typist are liable to be relaxed or condoned in certain cases.
We are, therefore of the opinion that the Vice-Chancellor has no power to relax the educational qualifications.
11.
The relaxation of qualifications accorded by the Vice-Chancellor is therefore, invalid.
Therefore, we are of the opinion that if any candidates have been recommended in the interview held on 22111994 who did not possess the necessary qualifications as per advertisement issued in the year 1991(Ann.
R2), those candidates have to be excluded from consideration from appointment.
12.
The learned counsel for the University contended that the earlier interview held on 22111994 has been scrapped because persons who secured less than 50% marks have also been interviewed and some of them found a place in the list of candidates recommended for appointment on the ground that a person who obtained 495% marks can be taken as having secured 50% marks on the basis of principle of rounding off the fraction.
The learned counsel for the petitioner brought to our notice that the Calendar of the University Vol. II provides rounding off the marks by the University in regard to admission to higher courses.
According to him the rule reads as follows :-  "In matter of calculating percentage of marks secured by a candidate in the lower examinations for admission to a higher course, if fraction worked out to 1/2 and more, it should be counted as one and fraction less than 1/2 be ignored."
13.
According to the learned counsel for the petitioner, the Syndicate has also taken a decision on 3101994 and approved that the rule that 05 or above will be rounded off to one which is applicable for admission will also be applicable at the time of initial appointment of employees/teachers.
But no such resolution of the Syndicate was placed before us.
Even if there is any resolution, it will be operative for the post that fell vacant after the said resolution.
It cannot be applied retrospectively for recruitment to fill up a vacant post that accrued in the year 1991 for which an advertisement was issued and that the process of selection has already commenced prior to issue of the alleged resolution.
Therefore, the petitioners cannot take advantage of the alleged resolution of the Syndicate nor can they take advantage of the rule providing rounding off the marks for admission to higher courses.
The advertisement clearly provides the selection procedure in the following terms :-  "All the candidates shall have to appear and qualify in a written test in English, Punjabi, General Knowledge and Elementary Arithmetic of Matric standard.
Only those candidates who obtained 50% or above marks (40% in the case of Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe/Backward Class candidates) may be called for typing test in Punjabi/interview."
Therefore, the procedure for selection clearly shows that a candidate enabling himself to be called for interview should obtain 50% marks or above in the written test.
50% or above marks cannot be read as equivalent to 495%.
Therefore, we are of the opinion that those persons who obtained 495% or below 50% marks in the written test are not eligible to be interviewed and if any such candidate is recommended by the selection committee for appointment at the interview held on 22111994, he has to be excluded.
14.
One of the contentions of the learned counsel for the University is that the candidates belonging to Scheduled Caste/Backward Class who secured more than 50% marks were not interviewed for the general category.
It is one of the reasons for scrapping the entire selection made at the interview held on 22111994.
There cannot be any doubt that a Scheduled Caste/Backward Class candidate who fulfil the qualifications for un-reserved quota is entitled to compete with the general category candidates against unreserved posts.
They cannot be denied the right to compete for general category quota on the ground that some posts have been reserved for Scheduled Caste/Backward Classes.
Thus the candidates belonging to these classes are entitled to be called for interview against general category quota.
But failure to call for interview such candidates belonging to Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes/Backward Classes who secured more than 50% marks in the written test alongwith general category candidates does not nullify the entire process of selection at the interview held on 22111994.
The proper course for the University is to interview all those candidates who obtained 50% marks belonging to Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes/Backward Class afresh and prepare a list of those candidates who have been interviewed earlier and make appointments on the basis of merit.
We do not see any force in the contention of the learned counsel for the University that the entire process of selection made on the basis of interview held on 22111994 is to be scrapped solely on the ground that the eligible candidates belonging to the reserved categories have not been interviewed against un-reserved quota.
15.
In view of our foregoing discussion, we dispose of the writ petition with the following directions :-  (a) The scrapping of the entire list of candidates recommended for appointment and the decision of the University to hold fresh interviews are illegal and, therefore, liable to be quashed.
We accordingly quash the decision to conduct fresh interviews of all the categories of candidates.
(b) We direct the University to exclude from the selection list prepared on the basis of interview held on 22111994, such candidates who do not fulfil the requisite qualifications as prescribed in the advertisement (Ann.
R2) issued in the year 1991.
(c) We also direct the University to exclude all those candidates who did not obtain 50% marks in the written test.
We make it clear that there is no question of rounding off the fraction and then make it one and those persons who have obtained only 495% marks and below 50% marks have to be excluded from being considered for appointment, if there is any such candidate in the list of candidates recommended for appointment by the selection committee at the interview held on 22111994.
(d) We further direct the University to conduct interviews only in respect of the Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribes/Backward Classes who secured more than 50% marks against general category vacancies and consider their cases alongwith other eligible candidates who have been recommended for appointment by the selection committee at the interview held on 22111994 on the basis of merit and ranking obtained by the candidates earlier and the candidates who are now directed to be interviewed from amongst the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes/Backward Classes who secured 50% or more marks in the written test.
16.
With the above directions we dispose of the writ petition.
There will be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.