NK Kapoor, J - This is defendants' regular second appeal against the judgment and decree of the Additional District Judge reversing in appeal the judgment and decree of the trial Court whereby suit of the plaintiff was dismissed.
2.
Plaintiff filed a suit for declaration to the effect that charge-sheet, enquiry report, show-cause notice, order of dismissal and subsequent order of rejection of appeal by the Deputy Inspector General of Police dated 7101986 are illegal, ultra vires, unconstitutional, mala fide and against the mandatory provisions of the Constitution of India.
3.
Case of the plaintiff is that he joined the police department in the year 1979 and was confirmed as Assistant Sub Inspector in 1982 by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Patiala Range, Patiala.
He was sent for undergoing upper school examination at Police Training Camp, Phillaur in 1982 and thereafter was promoted as Sub Inspector in 1983 by Deputy Inspector General of Police, Patiala.
It has further been stated that on account of his illness, he remained admitted in PGI, Chandigarh and so could not attend the office during the period of illness.
Authorities on the other hand held a departmental enquiry against him and thereafter have dispensed with his services which orders are being challenged as non est in the present suit.
4.
Defendants filed written statement and controverted all the material averments made in the plaint.
It was pleaded that plaintiff was appointed as temporary Assistant Sub Inspector w.e.f.
1831980 and was confirmed on 1431983 and was sent at Police Training Camp, Phillaur thereafter.
It was denied that plaintiff submitted any medical certificate as regards his illness or his confinement at PGI, Chandigarh.
It was further stated that in fact he remained absent for 58 days 3 hours and 10 minutes.
Defendant further justified the departmental enquiry as well as the rejection of his appeal/revision by the Higher authorities.
5.
On the pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed :-  1.
Whether the impugned orders dated 24.6.1986 and 7101986 are illegal, null and void etc. as alleged in the plaint ?
OPP.
2.
Whether the civil Court at Patiala has no territorial jurisdiction to try the present suit ?
OPD.
3.
Whether the suit is not properly valued for the purposes of Court fee and jurisdiction ?
OPD.
4.
Relief.
Trial Court decided issue No. 1 against the plaintiff holding that impugned orders dated 24.5.1986 and 7101986 are legal and valid.
Issue No. 2 was decided against the defendants.
Issue No. 3 was not pressed by the parties and so decided against the defendants.
Resultantly, suit of the plaintiff was dismissed.
6.
In appeal, the finding of the trial Court in respect of issue No. 1 was challenged.
It was contended by the appellant that Senior Superintendent of Police, Sangrur could not pass order of dismissal as he was not competent to do so.
According to the appellant, he was appointed by Deputy Inspector General of Police Patiala Range, Patiala and so Senior Superintendent of Police, who was lower in rank to him could not pass order of his dismissal.
This way, the trial Court erred in law in concluding that Senior Superintendent of Police could pass an order of dismissal of the services of the plaintiff.
Support was sought from the decision of this Court in Man Singh, Assistant Sub Inspector v. The State of Punjab and Ors., 1973(1) SLR 365.
The lower appellate Court once again examined the matter in the light of material placed before the Court and came to the conclusion that the appellant was confirmed as Assistant Sub Inspector by Deputy Inspector General of Police, Patiala and thus Deputy Inspector General of Police was his appointing authority.
Since the order of dismissal had been passed by Senior Superintendent of Police, an authority lower in rank to that of Deputy Inspector General of Police, the Court, relying upon the decision in Man Singh's case (supra) held the dismissal order to be violative of Article 311(1) of the Constitution of India and so set aside the same thereby allowing all the benefits of pay and allowances by way of consequential relief.
7.
Challenging the judgment and decree of the lower appellate Court the learned Assistant Advocate General has termed it to be wholly illegal and unsupportable on evidence.
According to the counsel, lower appellate Court has erred in not properly construing the provisions of Punjab Police Rule 134(2) which specifically makes mention that vis-a-vis the rank of a Sub Inspector it is the Senior Superintendent of Police who is the appointing authority and so the order of dismissal passed by the Senior Superintendent of Police is perfectly legal.
Otherwise too, the plaintiff had been promoted to the rank of officiating Sub Inspector purely on ad hoc basis subject to the condition that he was liable to be reverted without any show cause notice.
Under Rule 161 of Punjab Police Rules, Superintendent of Police is fully authorised to pass a dismissal order upto the rank of Sub Inspectors and Assistant Sub Inspectors.
This way, the judgment of the lower appellate Court deserves to be reversed.
8.
Counsel for the respondent on the other hand argued that it has come on record that the plaintiff was appointed as a Sub Inspector by the Deputy Inspector General of Police and so the Court below rightly came to the conclusion that he is the appointing authority of the plaintiff.
This being so, any order passed by a subordinate to the Deputy Inspector General of Police is unsustainable in law.
Thus, the appeal is devoid of substance and deserves to be dismissed.
9.
The dispute between the parties revolves around the appointment of the plaintiff to the post of Sub Inspector i.e. whether Senior Superintendent of Police/Superintendent of Police or Deputy Inspector General of Police is his appointing authority.
The defendants examined Shri Harbans Lal DW1, a functionary of the department.
It has come in his statement that he was appointed as temporary Assistant Sub Inspector and confirmed on 1431983 as such by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Patiala and thereafter promoted as officiating Sub Inspector vide order dated 20101984 passed by Deputy Inspector General of Police (exhibit D-5).
The statement of Harbans Lal DW-1 supports the contention of the plaintiff that Deputy Inspector General of Police is the appointing authority of the plaintiff.
This being so, the order passed by the Superintendent of Police has rightly been held to be without jurisdiction.
The counsel for the appellant placed reliance upon Punjab Police Rules 134. sub clause (2) and argued that the Superintendent of Police was also competent to pass an order of dismissal of the plaintiff in view of the specific provision in the Punjab Police Rules.
Rule 134. sub clause (2) authorises the Superintendents of Police and Assistant Superintendents Government Railway Police for officiating promotions to the rank of Sub Inspectors and Assistant Sub Inspectors i.e. the Superintendents of Police as well as Assistant Superintendents Government Railway Police can order such promotions.
This rule nowhere suggests that such promotions cannot be made by an authority higher to that of a Superintendent of Police.
In the present case, as per the witness of the defendants (Now appellants) plaintiff was appointed as Assistant Sub Inspector and thereafter confirmed on 1431983 as Assistant Sub Inspector by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Patiala.
Thus, Deputy Inspector General of Police was his appointing authority.
It has also come on record that subsequently vide exhibit P-5 dated 20101984 the plaintiff alongwith others was promoted as officiating Sub Inspector by the Deputy Inspector General of Police and it is only during this period that the enquiry had been held and ultimately an order of dismissal was passed.
Since the order of dismissal has been passed by an authority lower in rank to that of the Deputy Inspector General of Police such an order is clearly violative of Article 311 sub clause (1) of the Constitution of India and has rightly been held to be illegal and against the mandatory provisions of Article 311 Sub Clause (2) of the constitution of India.
Thus, I find no merit in this appeal and so dismiss the same.
Parties will, however, bear their own costs.