NK Kapoor, J - This is defendants appeal against the judgment and decree of the Courts below decreeing the suit of the plaintiff.
2.
Plaintiff filed a suit for declaration to the effect that his removal from service was against law and principles of natural justice and thus null and void and that he is entitled to be reinstated in the office of defendant No. 2 as well as entitled to pay and allowances from the date of removal of service i.e. 10101984 upto the date of reinstatement.
3.
Defendants opposed and contested the suit.
According to the defendants, the plaintiff was appointed as Beldar on 8.2.1983 and remained in service upto 1591984.
According to the defendants, the plaintiff received the salary in the capacity of a Beldar who was removed from service as his services were no longer required by the department.
According to the defendants, the plaintiff's service was terminated on 1591984 and not on 10101984.
According to the defendants, plaintiff was only a work-charged employee.
4.
On the pleadings of the parties, following issues were framed :-  1.
Whether the plaintiff had put in more than twenty months of continuous service, without any break prior to 10101984 ?
If so, to what effect ?
OPP.
2.
If the above issue is proved in the affirmative, whether the plaintiff is entitled to the declaration prayed for ?
OPP.
3.
Whether the plaintiff has no cause of action and no locus standi to file the present suit ?
OPP.
4.
Whether the suit is not maintainable in the present form ?
OPD.
5.
Whether the civil court has no jurisdiction to try the present suit ?
OPD.
6.
Whether the suit is time barred ?
OPD.
7.
Relief.
Following the judgment of this Court in case reported as Piara Singh v. State of Haryana, 1988(4) Service Law Reporter 739, issues No. 1 and 2 were decided in favour of plaintiff holding that the service of plaintiff was wrongly terminated and the plaintiff was held to be in service and entitled to all consequential benefits.
In view of decision on issues No. 1 and 2, issue No. 3 was decided against the defendants.
Issue No. 4 was also decided against the defendants.
Issues No. 5 and 6 were not pressed and so were decided against the defendants.
Resultantly, the suit of the plaintiff was decreed as prayed for.
5.
The lower appellate Court too found no merit in the appeal and so dismissed the same vide judgment and decree dated 1331990.
6.
The appeal was admitted.
It was further ordered that the same be listed after the decision in SLP(C) No. 16471 of 1989 and so ordered for stay of the impugned judgment.
7.
Learned counsel for the appellants has urged that in view of the decision of the apex Court in case reported as State of Haryana v. Piara Singh, 1992(3) SCT 201(SC) : AIR 1992 Supreme Court 2130 the appeal deserves to be allowed.
Elaborating, the counsel for the appellants read in extenso the observations of the apex Court as given in para No. 19 of the judgment.
According to the counsel, as per facts on record, the plaintiff barely worked for a period of 19 months as a work-charged employee and so such a person cannot be considered for regularisation in terms of the policy framed by the Haryana Government and approved by the Apex Court.
8.
Broad facts are not in dispute i.e. induction of the plaintiff as Beldar on 8.2.1983 and his discharge from service on 1591984.
The apex Court in para No. 19 of the judgment referred above has held that as far as work- charged employee, daily wage worker and casual labourer and concerned, they do not fall within the definition of a workman and so declined to accept the direction given by this Court with regard to these categories of employees.
Dilating upon the orders of the Government of Haryana dated 641990 which provided for regularisation of these persons on completion of 10 years of service, it was held to be appropriate.
The plaintiff admittedly had rendered 19 months of service as work-charged employee and so the order of discharge/termination is perfectly legal.
Accordingly, I accept the appeal, set aside the judgment and decree of the Courts below and dismiss the suit of the plaintiff.
No order as to costs.