KK Srivastava, J - The petitioners have approached this Court for quashing of charge-sheets date November 27, 1975 (Annexure 'P-1') and dated July 23, 1975 (Annexure 'P-2') and the order dated March 20, 1995 (Annexure 'P-3') appointing respondent No. 3 as Enquiry Officer and further proceedings before the Enquiry Officer.
2.
Can the punishing authority after the receipt of the reply to the charge-sheet appoint an Enquiry Officer any time after an inordinate delay or the same is to be done within a reasonable time ?
This is the precise question that calls for determination.
3.
The petitioners Amarjit Singh Bhatnagar and Ashok Kumar Dhir are working as Sub Divisional Engineers, Public Works Department (B&R), Punjab.
In the year 1972, the petitioner No. 1 was incharge of the execution of earth work done on ABK Road, within the municipal limits of Amritsar, falling in the Central Divisional No. 1, Amritsar.
Petitioner No. 2 was working under petitioner No. 1 as Junior Engineer.
The then Sub Divisional Engineer Jawahar Lal Jain called quotations for a sum of Rs. 3,000/- in the month of July, 1972, and later on in October, 1972, quotations were called for a sum of Rs. 10,000/-.
Approval of the Executive Engineer was obtained prior to the calling of the said quotations.
The work commenced in October, 1972.
It was completed in March, 1973.
Subsequently, in the year 1975, the petitioners were served with the charge sheet (Annexure 'P-1' and 'P-2') proposing to take action against them under Rule 8 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 (for short 'the Rules').
4.
The charges levelled against petitioner No. 1 were as under :-  Charge No. 1 : He is guilty of misconduct in ignoring codal rules in getting the work started in anticipation of formal allotment of work to the society and of negligence in not checking the X-sections; Charge No. II : He is guilty of gross misconduct in allowing excessive lead to the society and putting the department to financial loss; Charge No. III : He is guilty of misconduct in committing financial irregularity in exceeding the provisions of sanctioned estimate; and  Charge No. IV : He is guilty of gross misconduct in allowing excessive quantity of earth work to the society by taking excessive formation width of the road, with ulterior motives."
The charges levelled against petitioner No. 2 were as under :-  "Charge No.
I : He is guilty of misconduct is ignoring codal rules in the matter of causing excess ever the estimated provision; Charge No. II : He is guilty of misconduct in allowing excessive (sic) and the final bill with a view to give undue financial aid to the society with ulterior motives : Charge No. III : He is guilty of misconduct in recording fictitious measurements for earth work much after the execution of work; and Charge No. IV : He is guilty of gross misconduct in allowing excessive quantity of earth work to the society by recording excessive formation width, with ulterior motives."
Though the charge sheets were issued to the petitioners on November 27, 1975 and July 23, 1975 and they had filed their replies in December, 1975 and August, 1975 respectively, yet nothing happened regarding the enquiry into the charges till March 20, 1995, when the order Annexure 'P-3' was passed appointing respondent No. 3 DS Seth, Superintending Engineer, Public Works Department (B & R), Amritsar, as Enquiry Officer.
He was asked to hold enquiry against the petitioners and three others.
Mr. GS Gill, Executive Engineer, Central Works Division 2, Public Works Department (B&R), Amritsar, was appointed as the Presenting Officer.
It was inter alia directed that the enquiry be completed before May 30, 1995, under all circumstances and report be sent to the government.
In case of any problem, extension be sought before the date fixed by disclosing reasons and if it was not done, adverse view would be taken.
The Enquiry Officer (respondent No. 3) has proceeded with the enquiry and the enquiry is in progress.
The present writ petition was filed on July 11, 1995.
5.
The contention of the petitioners is that the conducting of the enquiry after a lapse of 20 years since the service of the charge-sheets on the petitioners is against the principles of natural justice and the provisions of the Constitution of India.
It has been argued inter alia that through the Enquiry Officer had started the enquiry proceedings, but no evidence has yet been recorded as the original record necessary for conducting the enquiry is not traceable.
The documents which have been asked for by the petitioners and which are relied upon by the respondents have not been supplied to the petitioner.
The petitioners have, throughout these 20 years, suffered inasmuch as due to the service of the charge-sheets on them, they have not been given due promotion and even Efficiency Bar has not been cleared by the department.
In these circumstances and particularly in view of the inordinate delay of about two decades, it is not possible for the petitioners to defend themselves properly and no just and fair enquiry can be held.
The petitioners have further contended that circular letter dated October 10, 1959, issued by the State of Punjab, a copy of which has been filed as Annexure 'P-6', fixes time limit for completion of departmental enquiries.
The said circular letter prescribes as under :-  "(1) The whole process of investigation and enquiry should be completed within six months (excluding period of reference to the Public Service Commission and period where proceedings are stopped due to a reference to a Court of law); (2) An extension of the period by another three months may be obtained under the orders of the Minister-in-Charge; and (3) If extension beyond nine months (i.e. period (i) and (ii) above) is needed, full facts and justification must be placed before the Cabinet and their approval taken."
The contention of the petitioners is that the respondents have ignored the directions contained in circular letter (Annexure 'P-6').
6.
The respondents, upon service of notice of motion, appeared and filed written statement.
It has been contended by the respondent that there is no period prescribed for initiating disciplinary proceedings or appointing an Enquiry Officer for concluding the diciplinary proceedings, however, if there is any delay it must be bona fide.
It is only in a case where delay which has caused prejudice to the delinquent officer that the Court should intervene.
It was further contended that it is for the petitioners to establish that they have been prejudiced by the delay.
The charge-sheets, it was argued, cannot be dropped merely on account of lapse of time.
In the written statement, reliance was placed on the case reported as JS Sanghera v. State of Punjab, 1994(3) SCT 628 (P&H) : 1994(4) Recent Services Judgments 533.
The facts of the case were not disputed regarding the service of the charge- sheets, filing of the replies and about appointment of the Enquiry Officer to enquire into the charge-sheets.
It was contended that since it was a case of common proceedings and the entire case was to be finalised after the comments on the explanation of other officers/officials were received from the Superintending Engineer, Central Works Circle, Amritsar, and in the circumstances the matter remained under correspondence between the Chief Engineer's office and the field office, that the delay in ordering for the holding of the enquiry into the charges took place.
The petitioners, it was contended, were charge-sheeted under Rule 8 of the Rules and since reply filed by the petitioners was not found satisfactory, the Enquiry Officer was appointed.
The petitioners should have defended their cases before the Enquiry Officer instead of invoking the jurisdiction of this Court by way of filing the writ petition.
It is alleged that the petitioners knew about the wrong done at the cost of the State exchequer.
The stand of the respondents is that all the documents are available on record and the same can be made available to the petitioners at the time of the enquiry.
The enquiry was, as a matter of fact, on the verge of completion and the evidence of the petitioners was also about to be closed when this writ petition had been filed.
The appointment of the Enquiry Officer had also been defended and it has been contended that the petitioners have been given proper opportunity to defend their cases.
It is not disputed that the petitioners were not promoted during this period and Efficiency Bar was not cleared, but the case of the respondents is that this was due to the overall bad service record of the petitioners.
7.
The factual position is not in dispute.
The petitioners were served with the charge-sheets in the year 1975 and the replies thereto were also filed within time and the decision to appoint the Enquiry Officer was taken on March 20, 1995.
The lapse of a period of about 20 years, has left the petitioners virtually defenceless.
At any rate, their defence is seriously eroded for want of record and evidence.
It may be pointed out that the proceedings which were conducted before the Enquiry Officer (respondent No. 3), a copy which has been shown by the learned counsel for the respondents, would go to show that the Presenting Officer himself mentioned before the Enquiry Officer that despite best efforts made by him to locate the documents relied upon while framing the charge-sheets, from both the Divisions, the entire record has not been able to be traced out as yet.
On June 27, 1995, the Presenting Officer had reiterated his stand and submitted before the Enquiry Officer that the record mentioned at serial Nos. 4 and 8 was not traceable at all, the case being 23 years old.
Further more, correspondence had been made with EE, C.W.D.
No. 2, on the issue of tracing out the old record, but the results were in the negative.
Similarly, correspondence had also been exchanged with the present Central Works Sub Division No. 3 and the previous one, i.e. Central Works Division No. 1, but without any positive results.
The Presenting Officer asked for atleast two weeks' time to trace out the record of the defunct division stating that the results may not be very encouraging.
It will, thus, appear that the records required to establish the charges as also the records required by the petitioners to defend themselves in the enquiry are not traceable and even the concerned Division is no longer functional.
8.
A Division Bench of this Court in JS Sanghera's case (supra), considered the effect of the charge-sheet issued after a delay of 15 years.
The point to be seen in the present case, as observed above, is whether the punishing authority can take its own time, after receipt of reply to the charge-sheet, to decide whether a departmental enquiry should be ordered or not.
As observed above, the charge-sheets were served in the year 1975 and the replies filed in the year 1975 itself.
The punishing authority took 20 years to decide whether a regular departmental enquiry should be held or not.
9.
We are of the view that in absence of any satisfactory explanation, the inordinate delay in ordering the regular departmental enquiry after receipt of replies to the charge-sheets would be a pointer that the departmental proceedings should not be allowed to continue.
The prejudice that would be caused after such a belated order of regular enquiry is quite obvious.
In the present case, as has been noticed above, the official record is not forthcoming.
In Jagir Singh v. State of Punjab, 1993(2) SCT 128(P&H) : 1993(1) S.L.R.
1, a Full Bench of this Court, had observed as under :-  "It is no doubt correct and reasonable also, that departmental proceedings initiated against the employees should be finalised expeditiously.
Expeditious disposal helps the employer as well as the employees as it removes uncertainty about the future career of the employees and lessens the financial burden in most of the cases where the employees are either placed under suspension or their promotions etc. are deferred during the pendency of the enquiry.
But, for how many months a particular departmental enquiry can be allowed to continue and after the expiry of how many months the approval of the Head of the Department, the Secretary to the Government/the Chief Secretary, the Minister Incharge, or the Cabinet (Council of Ministers) has to be entertained or not, is purely for the employer to consider.
In that process the delinquent employee cannot be associated nor does he have any say in the matter.
If the State Government have issued certain guidelines for the guidance of the various Departments or the disciplinary authorities to impress upon them the necessity of finalising the Departmental proceedings expeditiously or even within a fixed period, it does not mean that after the expiry of that period, a right in law accrues to the employee to approach the Court of law for the enforcement of these guidelines.
The employee may, in a fit case, approach the Court for the quashing of the proceedings, if the pendency of the enquiry has otherwise been protracted and delayed to an unreasonable extent by the employer himself."
A Full Bench of this Court in Dr. Ishar Singh v. State of Punjab, 1994(1) SCT 563 considered inter alia the following point :-  "Should the enquiry proceedings be quashed on the ground of long pendency alone ?"
In Dr. Ishar Singh's case (supra), after considering the various authorities, the Full Bench observed that there was no period of limitation prescribed for initiating the disciplinary proceedings; but still there must be a bona fide and reasonable explanation for delay, absence of which would entitle the Court to intervene and examine the case.
If the delay was found to have caused prejudice to the employee, the Court would normally interfere in the matter.
It was further observed that if the right of defence is found to have been denied due to delay, final order may be quashed.
10.
In the instant case, there is no delay in serving the charge-sheets on the petitioners.
As mentioned above, the charge-sheets were served on the petitioners in the year 1975; but the decision appointing the Enquiry Officer to conduct the enquiry into the charges was taken as late as on March 20, 1995.
From perusal of the record, we do not find any justifiable and sufficient reasons for this inordinate delay of about 20 years in taking the decision by the respondents to appoint the Enquiry Officer.
It may also be mentioned that during this period of about 20 years, records of the case required for defence by the petitioners are no longer available and their defence is seriously prejudiced.
Apart from it, as noticed above, even the Presenting Officer is finding it extremely difficult to locate the records required in the enquiry.
The right of defence of the petitioners is, thus, seriously jeopardised.
Not only this, a sword had been hanging in the shape of the threatened enquiry over the heads of the petitioners all these 20 years.
The petitioners have suffered for unduly long period of 20 years inasmuch as their Efficiency Bar has not been cleared and promotion has been denied to the petitioner.
For the reasons stated above, charge-sheets (Annexures 'P-1' and 'P-2' to the writ petition), the order (Annexure 'P-3' to the writ petition) appointing respondent No. 3 as Enquiry Officer and further enquiry proceedings qua petitioners are quashed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.