NK Kapoor, J - This is defendant's regular second appeal against the judgment and decree of the Additional District Judge affirming the judgment and decree of the trial Court whereby the suit of the plaintiff has been decreed.
2.
Plaintiff filed a suit for declaration that order dated 8.11.1977 passed by General Manager, Punjab Roadways, Moga by which his services have been terminated is illegal, wrong, ultra vires, against Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, principles of natural justice etc.  3.
Suit was resisted by the State of Punjab on the ground that the civil Court has got no jurisdiction to try the suit and that notice under Section 80 CPC has not been issued.
According to the defendant enquiry was conducted according to Rules and so the order of termination is valid.
4.
On the pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed :-  1.
Whether the order passed by the General Manager dated 8.11.1977 is illegal and void as alleged in para No. 5 of the plaint, for termination of services of the plaintiff ?
If so, its effect ?
OPP.
2.
Whether this Court has no jurisdiction to try the suit ?
OPD 3.
Whether no notice under Section 80 CPC was served upon the defendant ?
If so, its effect ?
OPD.
4.
Relief.
Trial Court decided issue No. 1 in favour of the plaintiff.
Issue No. 2 was decided against the defendant holding that the civil Court has got jurisdiction to try the suit.
Issue No. 3 was also decided against the defendant.
Resultantly, the suit of the plaintiff was decreed, declaring the order dated 8.11.1977 passed by the General Manager, Punjab Roadways, Moga is illegal and void.
Plaintiff was also held entitled to receive all emoluments attached to his post from the date of his termination till the date of his reinstatement.
5.
Before the appellate Court finding of trial Court in respect of issue No. 1 was only assailed.
Lower appellate Court once again examined the matter but found no ground to differ with the finding recorded by the trial Court in this regard.
The Court came to the conclusion that there has been non-compliance of the mandatory provisions in conducting the enquiry and so the enquiry is wholly vitiated.
6.
Before me, almost identical pleas have been raised which did not find favour with the Courts below.
Both the Courts on perusal of evidence have come to the conclusion that enquiry has not been conducted according to Rules.
Counsel for the appellant has failed to point out any infirmity in the approach of the Courts below.
Thus, finding no merit in the appeal the same is dismissed.
No order as to costs.