TS Doabia, J - A dispute was referred to the Labour Court.
This was to the effect as to whether an Assistant Mechanic is entitled to the wages of a Mechanic or not.
The dispute came to be referred under following circumstances.
1.
Initially, there were posts of Mechanics and Assistant Mechanics.
The Municipal Corporation created a new post of Foreman.
This led to the abolition of the post of the Mechanic.
It is the case of the petitioner that the employees whose cause is being espused were working as Assistant Mechanics are now performing the duties of Mechanics and therefore, they should be granted the same scale as was being given to the Mechanics.
This prayer of the petitioners stands rejected.
The order passed by the Labour Court is Annexure P/29.
The Labour Court has come to the conclusion that the persons who are working as Assistant Mechanics are entitled to that grade only which is meant for Assistant Mechanic.
2.
The learned counsel for the petitioners has submitted that the learned Labour Court has failed to exercise jurisdiction vested in it.
According to him, the Labour Court was not merely to interpret the Rules and Regulations but it could of its own examine as to whether some relief could otherwise be given by examining the nature of the duties which are performed by the workmen.
Reliance has been placed on a decision given by the Supreme Court in the case of Co-operative Cr.
Bank v. Ind Tri., Hyderabad, AIR 1970 SC 245.
In para 10, of the judgment following observations have been made :  "The jurisdiction which is granted to Industrial Tribunal by the Industrial Disputes Act is not the jurisdiction of merely administering the existing laws and enforcing existing contracts.
Industrial Tribunals have the right even to vary contracts of service between the employer and the employees which jurisdiction can never be exercised by a civil Court or a Registrar acting under the Co-operative Societies Act, so that the circumstances that, in granting relief on issue No. 1, the Tribunal will have to vary the special bye-laws framed by the Co-operative Bank does not lead to the inference that the Tribunal would be incompetent to grant the reliefs sought in this reference.
In fact, the reliefs could only be granted by the Industrial Tribunal and could not fall within the scope of the powers of the Registrar dealing with a dispute under Section 61 of the Act."
3.
The above observations do apply to the instant case.
The matter is accordingly remanded to the Labour Court.
It will go into the question as to whether the Assistant Mechanics were performing the duties of a Mechanic and if this be the case, an appropriate order as is permissible under the law be passed.
Disposed of accordingly.