VK Jhanji, J - In this petition, challenge is to order dated 1951989 whereby the petitioner (now represented by his heirs) has been dismissed from service as the President of India in pursuance of provisions of sub-clause (c) of second proviso to clause (2) of Article 311 of the Constitution of India felt satisfied that in the interest of security of the State it is not expedient to hold an enquiry against the petitioner.
2.
Petitioner who joined the Police Department as Constable on 391959, was promoted as Head Constable on 2351960 and confirmed as such on 161962; promoted as Assistant Sub Inspector on 141963, promoted as Inspector on 23.12.1978 and promoted as Deputy Superintendent of Police on 27.11.1986.
It has been averred that the petitioner was an athlete of Discuss Throw of All India Level and set up a new record on 161963 during All India Police Meet.
Further, it has been averred that throughout his career the petitioner was never subjected to any departmental enquiry nor any minor or major punishment was awarded to him.
While the petitioner was posted as CIA Inspector at Kapurthala, an FIR No. 60 dated 631986 under Sections 302/307/25 of IPC/Arms Act was Registered in PS Kotwali, Kapurthala.
In this case, seven persons were killed and 14 injured by the terrorists when they opened fire before the residential house of Superintendent of Police, Kapurthala.
Kabul Singh, President of S.G.P.C.
and D.S.P.
Jarnail Singh Brar were amongst the injured.
The investigation of this case was entrusted to the petitioner and he was successful in arresting the accused, Harinder Singh and Balwinder Singh who were involved in 40 murder cases and later on when arrested absconded from Kapurthala Jail after murdering two Jail wardens.
Further, when a case, FIR No. 74 dated 1281986 under Sections 3 and 4 of Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act and 25 of the Arms Act in PS Subanpur was registered, the petitioner was entrusted with the investigation.
Petitioner after working day and night was able to arrest renowned terrorist Tarsem Singh Kohar who had committed 50 murders in his career as terrorist.
The petitioner was also successful in arresting Sukhdev Singh, terrorist of village Kot Moulvi who was also involved in the aforementioned case, apart from committing 12 murders.
It was on account of this performance of duties that the petitioner was awarded Rs. one lac as reward besides being promoted as Deputy Superintendent of Police.
During his stay as Deputy Superintendent of Police, petitioner arrested lot of terrorists, recovered heavy arms and ammunition and killed terrorist, Durga Singh, in an encounter.
Since petitioner had arrested Tarsem Singh Kohar, terrorist, Avtar Singh Brahma, a renowned terrorist of national importance had decided to kill the petitioner.
When this information came to the notice of Director General of Police, Intelligence, Punjab, letter dated 2431987 was circulated by the Inspector General of Police, Intelligence and the petitioner was warned to be careful from terrorists.
3.
Petitioner in his petition has alleged mala fides against respondents 3 and 4 and averred that during his posting at Ajnala between 1651987 to 2151988, he apprehended a gold smuggler and accordingly, a case FIR No. 16 dated 471987 under Sections 307/411/414 IPC, 25 of Arms Act and 3 and 4 of TADA Act read with Sections 3/34/20 of the Passport Act was registered in PS Lokpoke against one Hardial Singh.
Hardial Singh, Charan Singh and Sukhdev Singh were the three persons from whom petitioner recovered 79 biscuits of gold.
Since these persons had close relations with respondent No. 3, Sh. AK Siddiqui, the petitioner was called by Mr. Siddiqui in the Rest House at Amritsar and asked to return to the accused their car which had been taken into custody.
Petitioner had further alleged that in a case FIR No. 299 dated 26101987 under Sections 307/34/411/414 IPC and 3 and 4 of TADA Act and 25 of the Arms Act at PS Ajnala, registered by him (petitioner) against Sukhjit Singh a Sukha and Hardial Singh (who was accused in the case referred to above), he recovered Rs. four lacs and a Maruti car.
Again respondent No. 3 called the petitioner and desired that the car be returned, but the petitioner refused to oblige him.
During the posting of the petitioner at Ajnala, Sh. Ranjit Singh, PCS, was posted as Sub Divisional Magistrate.
A case, FIR No. 38 dated 731988 under Sections 506/553/332/186, IPC was got registered by the petitioner against Sh. Ranjit Singh.
Respondent No. 4 Sh. Rajinder Singh who was working as Superintendent of Police there at the relevant time and later on remained posted as Senior Superintendent of Police, Majitha, was a close friend of Sh. Ranjit Singh because both were scheduled castes.
As respondent No. 4 wanted to help Sh. Ranjit Singh, he asked the petitioner for help but the petitioner again refused to oblige.
The petitioner has also averred that case, FIR No. 238 under Sections 411/414 IPC read with Sections 22/61/85 of the N.D.PS Act, PS Lopoke was registered against renowned smugglers namely Sukhwinder Singh and Ghasita Singh as Heroin weighing 105 kgs.
was recovered from them by the petitioner and the cost of Heroin was Rs. 3 crores 50 lacs.
Another FIR No. 255 under Sections 411/414 IPC read with Section 3 of Official Secrets Act read with Sections 22/61/85 of the N.D.PS Act, PS Lopoke was also registered against the above-mentioned two persons and the petitioner was able to recover from them Heroin weighing 17 kilogram valuing Rs. 51 lacs.
Another case, FIR No. 10/88 under Section 411/414, IPC, read with Section 3 of the Official Secrets Act, PS Gharinda was registered against Lakha Singh and Swinder Singh and 10 biscuits of gold weighing 100 totas valuing Rs. 40,000/- were recovered from them.
It was during this period that the extremists sent a letter to the petitioner and fixed Rs. 1,00,000/- as reward for murdering the petitioner.
On the basis of this, the department gave information to the petitioner and provided security and the petitioner was declared a security risk.
On 1941986, the house of the petitioner was attacked by the extremists and his niece Varinder Kaur was injured.
Petitioner faced many encounters with extremists and has given the Details of the same in Annexure P-3.
Petitioner was awarded for his work against extremist many a times.
Petitioner has alleged that respondent No. 4 during this period firstly remained as Superintendent of Police (Detective) Amritsar and then Senior Superintendent of Police, Majitha.
As the petitioner did not oblige respondent No. 4, he tried to harm the petitioner firstly by withdrawing all the guards of CRPF and further by collecting affidavits from smugglers, besides recommending that petitioner be transferred from Ajnala.
Petitioner has further alleged that respondent No. 4 at the instance of respondent No. 3 started collecting affidavits because the petitioner refused to toe line of respondent No. 3 who was demanding illegal gratification and asking the petitioner to release the smugglers.
Petitioner has also alleged that when he was transferred to Faridkot, campaign against the petitioner by respondents 3 and 4 assumed a new dimension and the extremists and smugglers who had suffered at the hands of the petitioner became easy instruments in the hands of respondents 3 and 4 for the purpose of victimisation.
Petitioner came to know about this mischievous game and accordingly submitted letter dated 13101988 to the Adviser to the Governor, Punjab and the Director General of Police, Punjab, Chandigarh specifically stating therein that the officers who are jealous against his performance are collecting material against him with mala fide intention in order to spoil his career.
In the said letter, petitioner also submitted that before any action is taken an affidamists collected from the smugglers, he be given a chance to appear before the competent Authority for explaining his position.
When the petitioner was transferred from Ajnala, respondents 3 and 4 took a golden opportunity to settle scores against the petitioner and they collected affidavits from Hardial Singh, Charan Singh, Sukhdev Singh, Sukhjit Singh Sukha and SI Manjit Singh and Piara Singh.
All these persons who were anti-national renowned smugglers and bad characters were made instrumental in getting the affidavits against the petitioner by respondents 3 and 4 in order to victimise him.
On these allegations, petitioner has challenged order dated 1951989 passed on the basis of mala fide exercise of powers and the petitioner having been made a victim of enmity throughout by these two officers.
In order to highlight his achievements, petitioner has made reference to Annexure P-6, a DO letter from Sh. KL Lekhi, IPS to Deputy Inspector General of Police with a copy to Sh. JF Riberio, Director General of Police, Punjab.
In this letter, the Superintendent of Police, Kapurthala, has highlighted the achievements of the petitioners and various detection works, efficiency and honesty which is a record in the entire police department.
In this very letter, the Director General of Police, Punjab was requested that the case of the petitioner be considered for promotion to the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police.
Petitioner has also annexed Annexures P-7 to P-14 to show that he was given Class-I commendation certificate along with a cash reward of Rs. 15,000/- by the Director General and Inspector General of Police, Punjab, another commendation certificate Class-II with a cash reward of Rs. 750/- by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Jalandhar Range, Jalandhar Cantt, commendation certificate with a cash reward of Rs. 199/- and also the certificate where the work of the petitioner in regard to his dealing with the terrorists was appreciated and also letter dated 2121987 from the Director General of Police, Punjab to the Deputy Inspector General of police, Jalandhar Range, Jalandhar Cantt, approving the appointment of his son, Sukhwinder Singh for appointment as temporary ASI in view of the most valuable and exemplary nature of services rendered by the petitioner in the maintenance of law and order and in curbing the extremists activities at the grave risk to his personal life.
4.
Respondents in their written statement have admitted that the petitioner was duly rewarded for the good work done by him in the performance of his duties, but with regard to orders passed against him it has been stated that the petitioner betrayed the confidence of his seniors and that is why he was dismissed from service by the Government under Article 311(2) (c) of the Constitution of India as he was found guilty of grave misconduct endangering the security of the State.
He also extorted money from innocent persons under the threat of booking them in Terrorist and Disruptive Activities Act cases.
Respondents 3 and 4 in their separate affidavits have denied the allegations of mala fide and have also denied that they have any links with smugglers or terrorists.
5.
Under clause (c) of second proviso to Article 311 (2) of the Constitution, no enquiry need be held if the President or the Governor, as the case may be, is satisfied that in the interest of security of the State it is not expedient to hold such enquiry.
In Union of India v. Tulsiram Patel, AIR 1985 SC 1416, the Apex Court while dealing with clause (c) of second proviso to Article 311 (2) has held that "the question under clause (c), however, is not whether the security of the State has been affected or not, for the expression used in clause (c) is "in the interest of the security of the State".
The interest of security of the State may be affected by actual acts or even the likelihood of such acts taking place.
Further, what is required under clause (c) is not the satisfaction of the President or the Governor, as the case may be, that the interest of the security of the State is or will be affected but his satisfaction that in the interest of the security of the State, it is not expedient to hold an inquiry as contemplated by Article 311(2).
The satisfaction of the President or Governor must, therefore, be with respect to the expediency or inexpediency of holding an inquiry in the interest of the security of the State.
The Shorter Oxford English Dictionary, Third Edition, defines the word "inexpedient" as meaning "not expedient; disadvantageous in the circumstances, unadvisable, impolite".
The same dictionary defines "expedient" as meaning inter alia "advantageous; fit, proper, or suitable to the circumstances of the case".
Webster's Third New International Dictionary also defines the term "expedient" as meaning inter alia "characterized by suitability, practicality and efficiency in achieving a particular end; fit, proper of advantageous under the circumstances".
It must be borne in mind that the satisfaction required by clause (c) is of the Constitutional Head of the whole country or of the State.
Under Article 74(1) of the Constitution, the satisfaction of the President would be arrived at with the aid and advice of his Council of Ministers with the Prime Minister as the Head and in the case of a State by reason of the provisions of Article 163(1) by the Governor acting with the aid and advice of his Council of Ministers with the Chief Minister as the Head.
Whenever, therefore, the President or the Governor in the constitutional sense is satisfied that it will not be advantageous or fit or proper or suitable or politic in the interest of the security of the State to hold an inquiry, he would be entitled to dispense with it under clauses (c).
The satisfaction so reached by the President or the Governor must necessarily be a subjective satisfaction.
Expediency involves matters of policy.
Satisfaction may be arrived at as a result of secret information received by the Government about the brewing danger to the security of the State and like matters.
There may be other factors which may be required to be considered, weighed and balanced in order to reach the requisite satisfaction whether holding an inquiry would be expedient or not.
If the requisite satisfaction has been reached as a result of secret information received by the Government, making known such information may very often result in disclosure of the source of such information.
Once known, the particular source from which the information was received would no more be available to the Government.
The reason for the satisfaction reached by the President or Governor under clause (c) cannot, therefore, be required to be recorded in the order of dismissal, removal or reduction in rank nor can they be made public."
The question whether satisfaction of the President or Governor under Article 311(2) is amenable to judicial review, was left open.
However, in AK Kaul and another v. Union of India and another, 1995(3) SCT 15(SC) : JT 1995 (4) SC 1, it has been settled by the Apex Court that satisfaction of the President or Governor is not immune from judicial review.
In this context, the following observations need be noticed :-  "Under clause (c) of the second proviso to Article 311(2) the President or the Governor has to satisfy himself about the expediency in the interests of the security of the State to hold an enquiry as prescribed under Article 311(2).
Are the considerations involving the interests of the security of the State of such a nature as to exclude the satisfaction arrived at by the President or the Governor in respect of the matters from the field of justiciablility ?.
We do not think so.
Article 19(2) of the Constitution permits the State to impose, by law, reasonable restrictions in the interests of the security of the State on the exercise of the right to freedom of speech and expression conferred by sub-clause (a) of clause (1) of Article 19.
The validity of the law imposing such restrictions under Article 19(2) is open to judicial review on the ground that the restrictions are not reasonable or they are not in the interests of the security of the State.
The Court is required to adjudicate on the question whether a particular restriction on the right to freedom of speech and expression is reasonable in the interests of the security of the State and for that purpose the Court takes into consideration the interests of the security of the State and the need of the restrictions for protecting those interests.
If the Courts are competent to adjudicate on matters relating to the security of the State in respect of restrictions on the right to freedom of speech and expression under Article 19(2) there appears to be no reason why the Courts should not be competent to go into the question whether the satisfaction of the President or the Governor for passing an order under Article 311(2) (c) is based on considerations having a bearing on the interests of the security of the State.
While examining the validity of a law imposing restrictions on the right to freedom of speech and expression this Court has emphasised the distinction between security of the State and maintenance of public order and has observed that only serious and aggravated forms of public order which are calculated to endanger the security of the State would fall within the ambit of clause (2) of Article 19.
(See Romesh Thappar v. The State of Madras, 1950 SCR 594, at p. 601).
So also in Tulsiram Patel (supra) the Court has pointed out the distinction between the expressions 'security of the State', 'public order' and 'law and order' and has stated that situations which affect public order are graver than those which affect law and order and situations which affect security of the State are graver than those which affect public order.
The President or the Governor while exercising the power under Article 311 (2) (c) has to bear in mind this distinction between situations which affect the security of the State and the situations which affect public order or law and order and for the purpose of arriving at his satisfaction for the purpose of passing an order under Article 311(2)(c) the President or the Governor can take into consideration only those circumstances which have a bearing on the interests of the security of the State and not on situations having a bearing on law and order or public order.
The satisfaction of the President or the Governor would be vitiated if it is based on circumstances having no bearing on the security of the State.
(Emphasis supplied).
If an order passed under Article 311(2) (c) is assailed before a court of law on the ground that the satisfaction of the President or the Governor is not based on circumstances which have a bearing on the security of the State the Court can examine the circumstances on which the satisfaction of the President or the Governor is based and if it finds that the said circumstances have no bearing on the security of the State the court can hold that the satisfaction of the President or the Governor which is required for passing such an order has been vitiated by wholly extraneous or irrelevant considerations."
In the context of judgment of the Apex Court referred to above, the impugn order needs to be viewed.
The order against the petitioner has been passed during the President rule in Punjab by the President of India in pursuance of provisions of sub-clause (c) of second proviso to Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India as it was found that the petitioner by misusing his official position not only collected huge amount of illegal gratification from criminals dealing in opium and gold smuggling but also extorted money from innocent persons under the threat of booking them in Terrorist and Disruptive Activities Act cases.
On this score, it has been opined that the petitioner is guilty of grave misconduct thereby endangering the security of the State.
6.
In order to ascertain the factual position, learned Assistant Advocate General, Punjab was asked to produce before me the record.
In compliance with the directions, the record was produced and on perusal of the same I find that the complaints against the petitioner were made only when he was posted as Deputy Superintendent of Police, Ajnala in the year 1986-87.
Before the petitioner came to be posted at Ajnala, his superior officers had not only recognised his achievement against the terrorists but he was also given cash reward of Rs. one lac.
He was also given commendation certificates along with other cash awards.
In this context, it would be useful to refer to letter, Annexure P-6, of Superintendent of Police, Kapurthala, highlighting the achievements of the petitioner on whose recommendation the petitioner was promoted as Deputy Superintendent of Police.
Record has further shown that the petitioner apprehending complaints against him had brought it to the notices of Sh. JF Ribeiro, Adviser to Governor, Punjab, vide letter dated 13101983 that because of jealousy and in order to mar his career, some of his colleagues are filing false complaints/affidavits against him.
He thus, sought his transfer from Ajnala sub-division to some other division.
Record has also revealed that no serious efforts were made to investigate the complaints/affidavits filed against the petitioner.
Keeping in view the past performance of petitioner and in order to ascertain the correctness of the complaints, least required was to make preliminary investigation/enquiry into these complaints.
Otherwise too, what has been stated in the order, Annexure P-1, is that by misusing his official position the petitioner has collected illegal gratification from opium and gold smugglers and has extorted money from some persons under the threat of booking them under the TADA cases.
The acts attributed to the petitioner have no bearing on the interests of the security of the State.
At best, these acts can be brought within the expression of 'law and order' or 'public order'.
Thus, I am of the view that the acts attributed to the petitioner have no relationship with the sipirit and situation envisaged by sub-clause (c) of second provision to Article 311 (2) of the Constitution of India.
The impugned order thus deserves to be quashed.
For the reason recorded above, this writ petition is allowed and order dated 1951989 dismissing the petitioner from service is quashed.
Petitioner now represented by his heirs shall be entitled to all consequential benefits.
No costs.