VK Jhanji, J - This shall dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 8257, 8430 and 9814 of 1991.
2.
In Civil Writ Petition No. 8257 of 1991, challenge is to order dated 1621991 (Annexure P-1) passed by Senior Superintendent of Police, Amritsar whereby petitioner, Sahib Singh, Constable, has been dismissed from service in exercise of powers under Article 311(2) (b) of the Constitution of India read with rule 161 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 (in short 1934 Rules).
3.
In Civil Writ Petition No. 8430 of 1991, order of dismissal dated 1621991 (Annexure P-1) passed by Senior Superintendent of Police, Amritsar in exercise of powers under Article 311 (2) (b) of the Constitution of India read with rule 161 of the 1934 Rules is being challenged by petitioner, Balwinder Singh, Constable.
4.
In Civil Writ Petition No. 9814 of 1991, petitioner, Dilbagh Singh, Constable, is challenging order dated 1821991 (Annexure P-1) which has been passed by Senior Superintendent of Police, Majitha and departmental enquiry has been dispensed with.
5.
In the cases of constables Sahib Singh and Balwinder Singh, the Senior Superintendent of Police, Amritsar has passed the order of dismissal on the ground that the petitioners have links and mixed up with extremists and their retention in police force is counter-productive.
For the reasons recorded separately, departmental enquiry was dispensed with.
In the case of constable Dilbagh Singh, the order of dismissal came to be passed as the Senior superintendent of Police, Majitha found that not only Dilbagh Singh had links with dreaded terrorist Kashmir Singh who was an active member of BTPK group but Dilbagh Singh and said Kashmir Singh had been taking part in sensational extremist activities like robbery, dacoity, killing of innocent persons.
He was found to be involved in cases, FIR Nos. 77 dated 2621991 and No. 12 dated 1011991.
Apart from this it was also found that he was supplying vital and classified secret information to the terrorists and rendering all kinds of help to continue nefarious activities.
In the impugned order, Senior Superintendent of Police also recorded reasons for dispensing with departmental enquiry and the reasons given are that in case departmental enquiry as envisaged under rule 1624 of 1934 Rules is held against the petitioner, it would consume a lot of time and the witnesses are not likely to depose against the petitioner as he has links with terrorists.
It has also been recorded that petitioner has become a security risk and his further continuance in service is not in public interest, rather it is deterimental to public interest.
6.
In the writ petitions, petitioners have challenged the orders of dismissal on the ground that there was no material available before the competent Authority on the basis of which it could possibly form an opinion that it would not be reasonably practicable to hold an enquiry.
Further, in the cases of Sahib Singh and Balwinder Singh, in the impugned orders though it has been stated that reasons have been recorded separately, but no such reasons were ever recorded.
In the case of Dilbagh Singh, order has been challenged also on the ground that there was no basis for observations made by the Senior Superintendent of Police that witnesses are not likely to depose against the petitioner or that he has become a security risk.
The orders thus, have been challenged on the ground of non-application of mind.
7.
Respondents in their written statements have averred that the petitioners have been dismissed from service on the ground that they have links with extremists.
8.
Learned counsel for the petitioners has contended that there was no sufficient and valid reason for dispensing with the holding of enquiry and the reasons given in the impugned orders are without any basis and simply an excuse for not following the procedure for departmental enquiry Counsel also contended that there was no material with the disciplinary Authority to form an opinion that the petitioners had links with extremists.
In answer to these submissions, Mr. SK Bhanot, Deputy Advocate General, Punjab, has supported the impugned orders and argued that the exercise of powers by the Competent Authority under the provisions of Article 311(2) (b) of the Constitution of India is bona fide and this Court cannot go into the sufficiency of reasons which prevailed upon the competent Authority for passing orders of dismissal against the petitioners.
9.
Under proviso (b) to Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India, no enquiry need be held if the Competent Authority records in writing that it is not reasonably practicable to hold such an enquiry.
The only requirement is that the Authority must be satisfied that it is not reasonably practicable to hold enquiry.
The Apex Court in Union of India v. Tulsiram Patel, 1985(2) S.L.R.
576, has held that the condition precedent for the application of clause (b) of the second proviso is that the disciplinary Authority should record in writing that 'is not reasonably practicable to hold the enquiry contemplated by clause (2) of Article 311 of the Constitution.
"What is requisite is the holding of the inquiry is not practicable in the opinion of reasonable man taking a reasonable view of the prevailing situation.
It is not possible to enumerate the cases in which to hold enquiry but some instance by way of illustration may however be given that it would not be reasonably practicable to hold enquiry where the government servant through or together with his associates, threw threats to beat up the witnesses and the Inquiry Officer, who are going to give evidence against him so as to prevent them from doing so or where the government servant by himself or together with or through associates, threatens the Officer or members of his family so that he is afraid to hold the enquiry or direct it to be held."
The Apex Court in Jaswant Singh v. State of Punjab, AIR 1991 SC 385 has held that the decision to dispense with the departmental enquiry cannot be rested solely on the ipse-dixit of the concerned Authority.
When the satisfaction of the concerned Authority is questioned in a Court of law, it is incumbent on those who support the order to show that the satisfaction is based on certain objective facts and is not the outcome of the whim or caprice of the concerned officer.
In that case, it was alleged that the petitioner therein, instead of replying to the show-cause notice, instigated his fellow police officials to disobey the Superiors and gave threats to beta up the witnesses and the Inquiry Officer, if any departmental enquiry was held against him.
The order of dismissal was quashed as it was not shown to the Supreme Court that on what material the respondent came to the conclusion that the appellant had thrown threats.
A Division Bench of this Court in Darshanjit Singh Dhindsa v. The State of Punjab and others, 1993(2) R.S.J.
651 has held that mere reproduction of the words of the statute are not sufficient to justify the finding of fact with respect to the satisfaction of the authority concerned.
In Civil Writ Petition No. 15701 of 1994 (Gurdev Singh v. State of Punjab and others) decided on 471995, a learned Judge of this Court on a conspectus of various decisions including decisions of Apex Court in Union of India v. Tulsiram Patel, AIR 1985 SC 1416, Union of India v. TR Chellappan, AIR 1975 SC 2216, Arjun Chaubey v. Union of India, AIR 1984 SC 1356, Jaswant Singh v. State of Punjab, 1992(3) SCT 1(P&H) : AIR 1991 SC 385 and Chief Security Officer and others v. Singasan Rabi Das, 1992(1) SCT 595(SC) : 1991(2) SLR 140, has held that order of dismissal, removal or reduction in rank passed by the competent Authority under any of the clauses under Article 311(2) is open to judicial review and the exercise of power under these clauses can be invalidated if the Court is convinced that the competent Authority has exercised the power without application of mind to the relevant considerations.
A person aggrieved by an order passed under proviso to Article 311(2) can challenge it, where the Authority whose satisfaction is in question has totally failed to apply its mind to relevant considerations; where its satisfaction is based on considerations which are not relevant; where the satisfaction is arrived at by the application of a wrong test or where the right questions are not asked; where the satisfaction is not grounded on materials which are of rationally probative value; and where the exercise of power is not in good faith.
10.
In order to test the argument of learned counsel for the petitioners that there was no material with the competent Authority to show that the petitioners had links with terrorists, the learned Deputy Advocate General, Punjab was asked to produce before me the records for showing that the orders have come to be passed on the basis of some material.
Despite adjourning the cases two-three times the records have not been produced, rather the State Counsel has fairly conceded at the Bar that the records in these cases are not available; only the records would have shown that any investigation or enquiry was made into the allegations linking the petitioners with extremists or the Senior Superintendent of Police had some other information that the petitioners had such links.
In the cases of Sahib Singh and Balwinder Singh, reasons for dispensing with the departmental enquiry have been record separately, but such reasons have not been produced before me and in absence thereof, there is no alternative but to hold that the impugned orders dated 1621991 (Annexure P-1) passed in the cases of Sahib Singh and Balwinder Singh separately, suffer from total non-application of mind and thus, liable to be quashed.
Inthe case of Dilbagh Singh too, the respondent have failed to support the order, rather the record has been withheld from scrutiny of this Court.
In view of this, order dated 1821991 (Annexure P-1) passed in the case of Dilbagh Singh has to be quashed.
11.
For the reasons recorded above, the writ petitions are allowed and orders dated 1621991, 1621991 and 1821991 passed in the cases of petitioners Sahib Singh, Balwinder Singh and Dilbagh Singh respectively are quashed.
The petitioners are directed to be reinstated in service with all consequential benefits.
This shall, however, not preclude the respondents to hold enquiry in case they intend to hold one against the petitioners in accordance with law and pass fresh orders, No costs.