VK Jhanji, J - In this petition, challenge is to the orders, Annexures P-1, P-2 and P-3 passed by Senior Superintendent of Police, Hoshiarpur, Deputy Inspector General, Jalandhar Range, Jalandhar and Inspector General of Police, Punjab, respectively.
Petitioner has prayed that his dismissal from service be declared illegal and respondents be directed to reinstate him into service with all consequential benefits.
2.
Petitioner joined Police Department as Constable on 121963, promoted as Head Constable in December, 1970 and confirmed as such in the year 1980.
In 1982, petitioner was promoted as ASI.
Vide order dated 1051989 petitioner was dismissed from service by Senior Superintendent of Police, Hoshiarpur in exercise of powers under Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution of India read with Punjab Police Rule 16.1.
The appeal filed by the petitioner against the order of dismissal has been rejected by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Jalandhar Range, Jalandhar and revision against this order was dismissed by the Inspector General of Police, Panjab.
Petitioner has challenged the order of dismissal on the ground that there is no material available before the Competent Authority on the basis of which it could possibly form an opinion that it would not be reasonably practicable to hold inquiry.
Further that there is no basis for the observation made by the Senior Superintendent of Police that terrorists or their supporters may cause bodily harm to the Inquiry Officer or the witnesses.
The appellate order as also the order passed in the revision have been challenged on the ground of non-application of mind.
3.
Respondents, in their written statement, have pleaded that the petitioner has been dismissed from service because it was found that he had links with the extremists especially Jaspal Singh alias Dhana Singh and Balbir Singh alias Bhikhi etc. and was also helping them financially.
The secret report is alleged to have been sent by DSP Dasuya to the SSP, copy of which is at Annexure R-1.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that there was no sufficient and valid reason for dispensing with the holding of the inquiry and the reasons mentioned in the impugned order of dismissal are without any basis and simply an excuse for not following the procedure for departmental inquiry.
He also contended that there was no material with the disciplinary/competent authority to form an opinion that the petitioner had links with the extremists.
5.
In answer to these submissions, Mr. SK Bhanot, learned Deputy Advocate General, Punjab has supported the impugned order and argued that the exercise of powers by the Competent Authority under the provisions of Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution of India is bona fide and this Court cannot go into the sufficiency of reasons which prevailed with the Competent Authority for passing the impugned order of dismissal.
He contended that the secret report furnished sufficient material for taking action against the petitioner as it would not have been possible for the department to establish the charge against the petitioner in regular inquiry under rule 162 of the Punjab Police Rules.
6.
Under Proviso (b) to Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India, no inquiry need be held if the Competent Authority records in writing that it is not reasonably practicable to hold such an inquiry.
The only requirement is that the Authority must be satisfied that it is not reasonably practicable to hold inquiry.
The Apex Court in Union of India v. Tulsiram Patel, 1985(2) S.L.R.
576 has held that the condition precedent for the application of clause (b) of the second proviso is that the disciplinary authority should record in writing that 'it is not reasonably practicable to hold the inquiry contemplated by clause (2) of Article 311 of the Constitution' What is requisite is that the holding of the inquiry is not practicable in the opinion of reasonable man taking a reasonable view of the prevailing situation.
It is not possible to enumerate the cases in which to hold inquiry but some instance by way of illustration may however be given that it would not reasonably be practicable to hold inquiry where the government servant through or together with his associate, threw threats to beat up the witnesses and the Inquiry Officer, who are going to give evidence against him so as to prevent them from doing so or where the government servant by himself or together with or through associates, threatens the Officer or members of his family so that he is afraid to hold the inquiry or direct it to be held.
The Apex Court in Jaswant Singh v. State of Punjab and Haryana, AIR 1991 Supreme Court 385 : 1991(1) SCT.
125 has held that the decision to dispense with the departmental inquiry cannot be rested solely on the ipse dixit of the concerned authority.
When the satisfaction of the concerned authority is questioned in a Court of law, it is incumbent on those who support the order to show that the satisfaction is based on certain objective facts and is not the outcome of the whim or caprice of the concerned officer.
In that case, it was alleged that the petitioner therein, instead of replying to the show-cause notice, instigated his fellow police officials to disobey the Superiors and gave threats to beat up the witnesses and the Inquiry officer, if any, departmental inquiry was held against him.
The order of dismissal was quashed as it was not shown to the Supreme Court on what material the respondent came to the conclusion that the appellant had thrown threats.
7.
On a conspectus of the decision of the Apex Court referred to above and in Bakshi Sardari Lal v. Union of India, AIR 1971 SC 1547, Shamsher Singh v. Union of India, AIR 1974 SC 2192, Union of India v. TR Chellappan, AIR 1975 SC 2216, Arjun Chaubey v. Union of India, AIR 1984 SC 1356, Jaswant Singh v. State of Punjab and Haryana, AIR 1991 SC 385, Chief Security Officer v. Singasan Rabi Dass, 1992(1) SCT 595(SC) : 1991(2) S.L.R.
140, Kedarnath Singh v. Union of India & others, 1984(2) S.L.R.
347, MK Kunjappan v. President of India and others, 1984(2) S.L.R.
669, President of India v. Kunjappan, 1985(2) S.L.R.
494, Union of India v. Subramanian, 1985(1) S.L.R.
238 and Naresh Kumar and another v. Commissioner of Police and another, 1992(7) S.L.R.
177, the learned Judge of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 12973 of 1993 decided on 2321995 has held that order of dismissal or removal passed under Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution of India is open to judicial review and can be invalidated if the Court is convinced that the competent authority has exercised the power without application of mind to the relevant consideration.
Validity of order passed under Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution can be challenged on various grounds including the following ones :-  (1) Where the authority whose satisfaction is in question has totally failed to apply its mind to relevant considerations; (2) Where its satisfaction is based on considerations, which are not relevant; (3) Where the satisfaction is arrived at by the application of a wrong test or where the right questions are not asked; (4) Where the satisfaction is not founded on materials which are of rationally probative value; (5) Where the exercise of power is not in good faith.
In the context of what has been discussed above, the impugned order needs to be tested.
8.
The Senior Superintendent of Police, Hoshiarpur has passed the order of dismissal on the ground that the petitioner has links with the extremists and in the interest of discipline of force and the security of the State/Country, is unsuitable to be retained in service.
Since the petitioner has alleged and the counsel too submitted at the Bar that the order has been passed without there being any material to form such an opinion, learned Deputy Advocate General, Punjab was asked to produce the records.
Case was adjourned twice to give an opportunity to the learned Deputy Advocate General, Panjab to produce the records to show that the Senior Superintendent of Police had verified the contents of the confidential report which was submitted to him by the Deputy Superintendent of Police, Dasuya (Annexure R-I).
No such record has been produced.
Rather, the Deputy Advocate General, Punjab has stated at the Bar that the record in this case is not available.
The order of dismissal does not make reference to the confidential report of the Deputy Superintendent of Police, Dasuya or any other material on the basis of which he recorded his conclusion that the petitioner is mixed up with the extremists.
In the confidential report, the Deputy Superintendent of Police though has stated that he has come to know from reliable source that the petitioner has links with the extremists, Jaspal Singh alias Dhana Singh and Dalbir Singh alias Bhikhi and has kept them informed well in advance about the movements of Police as a result of which police has not been able to apprehend them but in this report, he has not disclosed his source from whom he obtained this information.
In his report, he has recommended that the petitioner be removed from service under Article 311 of the Constitution from the police department.
Only the records would have shown if any inquiry was made by the Senior Superintendent of Police in regard to the truthfulness of the report of the Deputy Superintendent of Police or had some other information before him indicating that the petitioner had links with the extremists.
It may be possible that the Competent Authority came to be influenced by the confidential report submitted to him by the Deputy Superintendent of Police and solely acted on his recommendation.
It is for the respondents to show that there was material to justify the dispensing with the enquiry envisaged by Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution and the satisfaction recorded in the order is based on certain objective facts.
Mere reproduction of the words of the statute are not sufficient to justify the finding with respect to the satisfaction of the Authority concerned.
In the present case, as noticed, the respondents have failed to support the orders.
Rather, the record has been withheld from the scrutiny of this Court.
In view of this it must be held that the impugned order, Annexure P-1 suffers from total non-application of mind and that the Competent Authority has passed the order without there being any material for recording his satisfaction that it is not reasonably practicable to hold the inquiry.
The appellate order as also the order passed in revision cannot be sustained as they do not contain any reason in support of the conclusion recorded by the disciplinary Authority.
Moreover, the initial order passed by the Senior Superintendent of Police having been held to be bad in law, the appellate as well as revisional orders are liable to be quashed.
9.
For the reasons recorded above, this writ petition is allowed, and orders, Annexure P-1 to P-3 are quashed.
Petitioner is directed to be reinstated in service with all consequential benefits.
This shall, however, not preclude the respondents to hold inquiry against the petitioner in accordance with law in case they intend to hold one and pass fresh order.
No costs.