VK Jhanji, J - In this petition, challenge is to orders, Annexures P-1, P-2 and P-3 passed by the Senior Superintendent of Police, Amritsar, Inspector General of Police, Punjab and Director General of Police, Punjab respectively.
Petitioner has prayed that his dismissal from service be declared illegal and respondents be directed to reinstate him in service with all consequential benefits.
2.
Petitioner joined Police Department as constable on 21.10.1971 and was promoted as Head Constable in 1984.
Vide order dated 21.10.1986 petitioner was dismissed from service by Senior Superintendent of Police, Amritsar in exercise of powers under Article 311(2) (b) of the Constitution of India read with rule 161 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 (in short 1934 Rules).
Appeal filed by the petitioner against the order of dismissal has been rejected by the Inspector General of Police, Punjab, and the mercy petition has been dismissed by the Director General of Police, Punjab.
The petitioner has challenged the order of dismissal on the ground that there was no material available before the Competent Authority on the basis of which it could possibly form an opinion that it would not be reasonably practicable to hold enquiry.
Further that the material, if any, on record has stood judicial scrutiny of the Designated Court and the petitioner having been acquitted, the very basis of the departmental action is shattered and therefore, it can be said that the impugned order is not based on any material.
The orders, Annexures P-2 and P-3 have been challenged on the ground of non-application of mind.
Respondents in their written statement filed through Senior Superintendent of Police, Amritsar have pleaded that the petitioner has been dismissed from service on the basis of sufficient material and acquittal of the petitioner from the Judicial Court has nothing to do with the order of dismissal which has been passed on different criteria.
Respondents have further stated that the order of dismissal was passed before trial of the petitioner in the criminal case.
In the departmental action and in the judicial trial, the evidence is weighed differently.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that when the charges into the allegations against the petitioner could form the subject matter of public trial in a sessions case, the enquiry into these allegations in departmental proceedings cannot be said to be impracticable.
Counsel also contended that there was no material with the competent Authority to form an opinion that the petitioner was in league with extremists who committed the murder of one Comrade Baldev Singh Mann.
In response to these submissions, Mr. SK Bhanot, Deputy Advocate General, Punjab has supported the impugned orders and argued that the exercise of powers by the competent Authority under the provisions of Article 311(2) (b) of the Constitution of India is bona fide and this Court cannot go into the sufficiency of the reasons which prevailed with the Competent Authority for passing the order of dismissal.
4.
Under proviso (b) to Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India, no enquiry need be held if the competent Authority records in writing that it is not reasonably practicable to hold such an enquiry.
In order to bring the matter within the scope of proviso (b) of Article 311(2) there should be reasons in writing for the Authority being satisfied that it is not reasonably practicable to hold an enquiry.
The Apex Court in Union of India v. Tulsiram Patel, 1985(2) SLR 576 has held "what is requisite is that the holding of the inquiry is not practicable in the opinion of reasonable man taking reasonable view of the prevailing situation.
It is not possible to enumerate the cases in which to hold inquiry but some instance by way of illustration may however be given that it would not be reasonably practicable to hold inquiry where the Government servant through or together with his associates, threw threats to beat up the witnesses and the Inquiry Officer, who are going to give evidence against him so as to prevent them from doing so or where the government servant by himself or together with or through associate, threatens the officer or members of his family so that he is afraid to hold the inquiry or direct it to be held."
The Apex Court in Jaswant Singh v. State of Punjab, AIR 1991 SC 385 has held that the decision to dispense with the departmental enquiry cannot rest solely on the ipse dixit of the concerned Authority.
When the satisfaction of the concerned Authority is questioned in a Court of law, it is incumbent on those who support the order to show that the satisfaction is based on certain objective facts and is not the outcome of the whim or caprice of the concerned officer.
A Division Bench of this Court in Darshanjit Singh Dhindsa v. The State of Punjab and others, 1993(1) SCT 338(P&H) (DB) : 1993(2) R.S.J.
651 has held that mere reproduction of the words of the statute are not sufficient to justify the finding of fact with respect to the satisfaction of the authority concerned.
In Civil Writ Petition No. 12973 of 1993 decided on 2321995, a learned Judge of this Court on a conspectus of decisions of the Courts including the Apex Court referred to above and in Bakshi Sardari Lal v. Union of India, AIR 1971 SC 1547, Shamsher Singh v. Union of India, AIR 1974 SC 2192, Union of India v. TR Challappan, AIR 1975 SC 2216, Arjun Chaubey v. Union of India, AIR 1984 SC 1356, Jaswant Singh v. State of Punjab, 1991(1) SCT 125(SC) : AIR 1991 SC 385, Chief Security Officer v. Singasan Rabi Dass, 1992(1) SCT 595(SC) : 1991(2) S.L.R.
140, Kedarnath Singh v. Union of India and others, 1984(2) S.L.R.
347, MK Kunjappan v. President of India and other, 1984(2) S.L.R.
669, President of India v. Kunjappan, 1985 (1) S.L.R.
494, Union of India v. Subramaniam, 1985(1) S.L.R.
238 and Naresh Kumar and another v. Commissioner of Police and another, 1992(7) S.L.R.
177, has held that the order of dismissal or removal passed under Article 311(2) (b) of the Constitution of India is open to judicial review and can be invalidated if the Court is convinced that the competent Authority has exercised the power without application of mind to the relevant considerations.
A person aggrieved by an order passed under proviso to Article 311(2) can challenge it, where the Authority whose satisfaction is in question has totally failed to apply its mind to relevant considerations; where its satisfaction is based on considerations which are not relevant; where the satisfaction is arrived at by the application of a wrong test or where the right questions are not asked; where the satisfaction is not in good faith.
5.
In the context of what has been discussed above, the impugned orders need to be viewed.
The Senior Superintendent of Police, Amritsar has pased the order of dismissal on the ground that during the course of investigation of case FIR No. 288 dated 2691986 under Section 302, IPC and 25/54/59, Arms Act, Police Station, Ajnala, one challan chit prepared by the petitioner was found lying at the spot with one Khalistan Commando Force poster.
Petitioner during his investigation admitted that the said chit is in his handwriting issued by him to Jagdish Singh who is relation of Constable Amrik Singh No. 1334/SR residing near his quarter at Civil Lines, Police Complex.
The scooter allegedly used in the commisison of crime belonged to one Santokh Singh, a close relation of Amrik Singh, Constable.
Petitioner along with Constable Amrik Singh was found to have played a nefarious role by helping the accused in the commission of crime in which Comrade Baldev Singh Mann was shot dead.
It is also recorded in the order that during further investigation it has been found that petitioner and Constable Amrik Singh are in league with extremists who committed the murder of Comrade Baldev Singh Mann.
On the basis of these facts, the Senior Superintendent of Police, Amritsar was convinced that regular departmental enquiry as laid down in rule 16.24.1934 Rules is not practicable because the witnesses of the enquiry are co-accused and are not likely to depose against them, more particularly when the petitioner and Amrik Singh have alliance with extremists.
It is not in dispute that the charges that the petitioner had played a role in helping the accused in commission of crime in which Comrade Baldev Singh Mann was murdered and the evidence linking the petitioner to that crime, i.e. challan chit found at the site of the crime, were the subject-matter of Sessions Case No. 174/T/24.10.1987 in which along with others the petitioner was arrayed as one of the accused.
The Designated Court, District Jail, Nabha vide order dated 1141989 found that the evidence produced in the case is not reliable and is not helpful to convict the petitioner and others accused.
All the accused including the petitioner were acquitted of the charges framed against them.
When the enquiry into the charges levelled against the petitioner could form the subject matter of public trial in sessions case the enquiry into those allegations in a departmental proceeding cannot be said to be impracticable.
The departmental proceedings are not open to public.
Only the petitioner and the Enquiry Officer would be present.
Whatever material is placed in support of the charges would be known to the departmental authority and the delinquent employee.
But when that very material and perhaps some more is placed before the Court at a public trial, it is beyond one's comprehension that as to how it can be said that it is not reasonably practicable to hold departmental enquiry.
Since the counsel submitted at the Bar that the order has been passed without there being any material to form such an opinion, learned Deputy Advocate General, Punjab was asked to produce records.
Case was adjourned twice to give an opportunity to the learned Deputy Advocate General, Punjab to show the material on the basis of which the Senior Superintendent of Police formed his opinion that the petitioner is in league with extremists who committed the murder of Comrade Baldev Singh Mann.
No such record/material has been produced.
The learned Deputy Advocate General, Punjab has stated at the Bar that the record in this case is not available.
Only the record would have shown if any investigation was made into the allegations linking the petitioner with extremists or the Senior Superintendent of Police had some other information before him indicating that the petitioner had such links.
The only material, referred to in the impugned order, linking the petitioner with the extremists is the challan-chit in the handwriting of the petitioner found at the site of the crime and some more evidence which probably was collected during the course of further investigation but no such record has been produced for the scrutiny of this Court.
It is for the respondents to show that there was material to justify the dispensing with the departmental enquiry envisaged by Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution and the satisfaction recorded in the order is based on certain objective facts.
In the present case the respondents have failed to support the orders; rather the record has been withheld from the scrutiny of this Court.
Therefore, it must be held that the Authority whose satisfaction is in question has totally failed to apply its mind to relevant considerations and that the competent Authority has passed the order without there being any material for recording his satisfaction for dispensing with the departmental enquiry.
The appellate order passed in appeal too cannot be sustained as it does not contain any reasons to support the finding recorded by the disciplinary Authority.
Moreover, the initial order passed by the Senior Superintendent of Police having been held to be bad in law, the orders passed by the Inspector General of Police, Punjab on the mercy petition are liable to be quashed.
6.
In the result, this writ petition is allowed and orders, Annexures P-1 to P-3 are quashed.
The petitioner is directed to be reinstated in service with all consequential benefits.
This shall, however, not preclude the respondents to hold enquiry against the petitioner in accordance with law in case they intend to hold one and pass fresh order.
No costs.