Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioners in these two cases viz. CWP Nos. 347 and 1608 of 1990 have approached this Court with a two-fold prayer.
Firstly, they pray for the issue of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to regularise their services.
Secondly, they claim parity in scales of pay with the regular employees.
2.
The petitioners were recruited to various Class IV posts like Belders and Malis-cum-Chowkidars.
The appointments were made during the year 1988-89.
The petitioners were appointed on daily wages.
In view of the interim orders passed by the Motion Bench, they have continued to hold their respective posts.
The prayer for regularisation is based on the decision of a Division Bench of this Court in Piara Singh v. State of Haryana, CWP No. 72 of 1988 decided on September 26, 1988.
The parity in the matter of pay has been claimed on the basis of the provisions of the Constitution contained in Article 39(d) which enunciates the principle of equal pay for equal work.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents in CWP No. 347 of 1990 it has been averred that the petitioners had been recruited to meet the urgent need of carrying out work and that they are not entitled to pay at par with regular employees.
It has been averred that the petitioners are not entitled to claim regularisation of their services.
4.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
So far as the claim for regularisation is concerned, Mr. GP Singh, learned counsel for the petitioners has very fairly stated that in view of the decision of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in State of Haryana v. Piara Singh, 1992(4) SLR 770 : 1992(3) S.C.T.
201, as also the instructions issued by the Government, the prayer made by the petitioners is not tenable at this stage.
He has consequently given up this part of the prayer.
However, he has very vehemently contended that the petitioners are discharging the duties of the posts in the same manner as the regular employees, and thus, they are entitled to payment of salary at the same rate at which it is being paid to those appointed on regular basis.
Ms. Ritu Bahri, learned counsel for the respondents submits that there is an essential difference in the nature of duties performed by a regular employee and those attached to the posts of daily wager.
In view of this difference, she submit that the claim for parity in the matter of pay should not be sustained.
5.
It is true that a regular employee has to be present every day.
He cannot stay away from the job without the grant of leave.
In case of absence from duty, he is liable to be punished.
In case of any other kind of misconduct, he is subject to the provisions of Discipline and Appeal rules.
As against this, a person appointed on daily wages cannot be normally dismissed even if he remains absent continuously for a long period.
He is also not subject to the strict discipline that applies to a regular employee.
In spite of this, it is clear that the consistent view taken by the Courts is that if two persons are performing similar duties, they must be paid equally.
The principle of equal pay for equal work has been consistently applied by the Apex Court as well as by this Court.
In Surinder Singh and another v. The Engineer in Chief, CPWD and others, AIR 1986 SC 584, it was held that "the persons employed on a daily-wage basis in the Central Public Works Department are entitled not only to daily wages but are entitled to the same wages as other permanent employees in the department employed to do the identical work.
In this connection, it cannot be said that the doctrine of 'equal pay for equal work' is a mere abstract doctrine and that it is not capable of being enforced in a court of law.
The Central Government, the State Governments and like all public sector undertakings are expected to function like model and enlightened employers and argument that the principle of equal pay for equal work is an abstract doctrine which cannot be enforced in a court of law should ill-come from the mouths of the State and State Undertakings".
Within this Court, while deciding CWP No. 16201 of 1991, a Division Bench of this Court vide its order dated February 20, 1992 held that "it is not desirable that the State should exploit labour and pay them less wages.
The work to be done by the daily wagers as well as regularly employed Mali-cum-Chowkidars would be the same, the principles of equal pay for equal work would squarely be applicable to the case in hand."
This order has the imprimatur of their Lordships of the Supreme Court inasmuch as special leave petition No. (C) 13105 of 1993 against the decision of the Division Bench was dismissed on November 24, 1993.
6.
In view of the above, it is held that the petitioners are entitled to the payment of salary at the same rate at which it is being paid to the regularly appointed Belders Malis-cum-Chowkidars.
The writ petitions are, accordingly, allowed in so far as these relate to claim for salary.
It is held that the petitioners shall be entitled to the payments of salary at the same rate at which it is being paid the regularly appointed persons with effect from the date of filing of the writ petitions.
The pay of the petitioners shall accordingly be fixed and the arrears which become due shall be paid within four months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.