V Sivaraman Nair, J - Petitioner obtained appointment in a clerical cadre of the Canara Bank represented by respondents 2 and 3 on being selected by the Banking Service Recruitment Board, which is represented by the respondents 4 and 5.
The 2nd respondent in communication No. 1 BNSS : 48200 : E-19 dated 11121981 terminated her service within a short while after her appointment.
Petitioner challenges the order terminating her service Incidentally, she also assails GO Ms No. 44, Social Welfare (E) Department dated 2321979, which according to her was the reason for issue of the impugned order of termination of service.
2.
Petitioner had acquired practical training under "Earn while you learn Scheme" organised by the Canara Bank for the period from 1391977 to 31.3.1978 while she was in 1st year B.Sc.
She appeared for recruitment pursuant to a notification issued by the Banking Recruitment Board.
Her application dated 181278 was accompanied by a certificate showing that she belongs to 'Wanjari' caste, which was claimed to be one of the Scheduled Tribes.
The 4th respondent recruited her in the quota reserved for Scheduled Tribes.
At the interview preceding appointment, she produced her caste certificate dated 1841980 issued by the Special Tehsildar, Urban Land Ceilings, Hyderabad.
She was appointed with a a caution that, if on verification, it was found that her claim to belong to Scheduled Tribe was incorrect, her service would be terminated.
The Tehsildar, Medchal Taluk, issued the Original Caste Certificate in proceedings L Dis.
No. A3/ 5461/78 dated 2981978 based on the report of the Patwari, Medichal Village and Revenue Inspector of Medchal Circle, who had satisfied themselves about her claim, and it was on production of that Certificate before the Competent Authority that he issued the Certificate dated 1841980 in the proforma as provided in GO Ms No. 245 Social Welfare dated 3061977.
Petitioner also submits that she had completed her period of probation and was confirmed and therafter her services could not have been terminated except after due enquiry or atleast notice containing proposal for such termination.
Counsel submits that the State Government had declared "Wanjari' as the synonym of 'Sugali ' which has been declared as a Scheduled Tribe by issue of GO Ms NO. 245, dated 3061977, and the Caste Certificates were issued by the competent authorities in pursuance of that order.
It is the case that the above Government order was issued after due enquiry through the Director, Tribal Cultural Research Institute, Hyderabad.
It is also the submission that the above order had the effect of including "Wanjari' caste as a Scheduled Tribe.
It is her further submission that respondents have issued the offending order on basis of GO Ms No. 44 Social Welfare dated 2321979 which deleted 'Wanjari' from the purview of GO Ms No. 245 dated 30.6.77.
Petitioner submits that this order was not preceded by any enquiry nor was the large number of members of 'Wanjari' caste been informed about the proposed removal.
Counsel therefore submits that GO Ms No. 44 mentioned above is illegal as it violates the principles of natural justice.
It is his further submission that even assuming GO Ms No. 44 is valid, it could have only been prospective and cannot nullify the caste certificate issued as early as on 2981978 by the Tehsildar, Medchal, who was one of the competent authorities designated in GO Ms No. 147 Social Welfare dated 27.4.1977.
The assumption on the basis of which the 2nd respondent issued the impugned proceedings terminating the service of the petitioner was that the removal of 'Wanjaries' was operative from the date of issue of GO 245 dated 3061977 and that assumption is factually wrong and legally unsustainable.
3.
In the counter-affidavit, the 1st respondent has asserted that the petitioner was appointed only on the basis of her caste certificate produced at the time of interview and that was dated 1841980, subsequent to the issue of GO Ms No. 44 dated 2321979.
It is submitted further that 'Wanjaries' were never included as Scheduled Tribe and it was not the intention of the Government in issuing GO Ms No. 245 dated 3061977 to add to or delete from the list of Scheduled Tribes notified under Article 342 of the Constitution of India.
It is submitted that GO Ms No. 44 dated 2321979 did not have the effect of deletion of any Scheduled Tribe from the Schedule to the Constitution of India.
It is submitted that GO Ms No. 245 only prescribed the procedure for verifying claims of people to belong to Scheduled Castes/Tribes and did not have the effect of notifying Scheduled Tribes or amplifying the extent of the application of the Schedule.
Petitioner was appointed with a specific condition that if it was proved on enquiry or verification, that her claim to be a member of the Scheduled Tribe was found to be incorrect, she would not been tentitled to claim continuance in service.
4.
On the pleadings as above, the question which I have to consider is whether the petitioner really belongs to Scheduled Tribe by reason of inclusion of 'Wanjari" as one of the synonyms of 'Sugali' in Item 24, Annexure-II of that order.
A further question which arises is whether GO Ms No. 44 Social Welfare Department, dated 2321979 removed 'Wanjari' from the list of Scheduled Tribes, contrary to any provision of law or in violation of natural justice.
5.
A brief look at the history of Scheduled Tribes in Scheduled/backward areas which was the genesis of protection of such areas and people and preference for those people for advancement in the social life is necessary at this stage.
As early as in 1874, the then Government of India had promulgated the Scheduled Districts Act 14 of 1874.
Those districts and the people therein were found to deserve special protection in view of their insular position, tribal characteristics and cultural isolation.
Government of India wanted to avoid, to the extent possible, exploitation of such people by the socially and economically advanced sections of people.
Such areas which were treated as Scheduled Districts were called 'backward areas' in the Government of India Act, 1919.
A list of backward Tribes was also prescribed indicating the tribes which deserved special attention, encouragement, protection and safety.
In the Government of India Act, 1935, Chapter V was engrafted dealing with excluded areas and partially excluded areas.
With the advent of the Constitution of India, special provisions were made in parts XV and XVI of the Constitution, to help retain the cultural identity and tribal characteristics of the people in the Scheduled areas and to protect them from exploitation by sophisticated sections of the society.
6.
Article 342 of the Constitution of India conferred on the President, the power to specify the tribes or tribal communities or parts of or groups within tribes or tribal communities, which shall, for the purposes of the Constitution be deemed to be Scheduled Tribes in relation to that State or Union territory, as the case may be.
Such notification was to issue after consultation with the Governor of the State.
Sub-Article (2) conferred the power of inclusion in or exclusion from the list of Scheduled Tribes specified by a Presidential notification, to the Parliament only.
It was also specified that except as above, a notification issued under Article 342(1) "shall not be varied by any subsequent notification."
The President of India issued the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950 and the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950 in exercise of the power under Article 342(1) and 342(2).
Those orders were amended by modification, inclusion or exclusion etc. when the Parliament enacted the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Order (Amendment) Act, 1976 (Act 198 of 1976).
7.
It is clear from Article 342 that the only authority competent to notify Scheduled Tribes initially is the President of India, and the only authority entitled to amend the Schedule by inclusion or exclusion of any tribe, is the Parliament under Article 342(2).
8.
To test the claim of the petitioner that she belonged to a Scheduled Tribe on the basis of Certificates which she had produced-whether it be the one on which she relies, viz., 2981978 or 1841980 - what we have to see is whether 'Wanjari' has been included as a Scheduled Tribe in the Presidential Order of 1950, or has been notified as one of the Scheduled Tribes under Act 108 of 1976.
I have verified both.
In neither, 'Wanjari' is mentioned as a Scheduled Tribe.
Naturally, that should have ended any further enquiry into the petitioner's case.
The question whether GO Ms No. 245 Social Welfare dated 3061977 was wrongly amended by GO Ms No. 44 and the consequences thereof, are not really matters which arise for consideration.
Petitioner has no case that under any other law governing the matter, the State Government has the power to include or exclude any tribe or caste as a Scheduled Tribe for purposes of reservation pursuant to the provisions of the Constitution of India.
If that be the real constitutional and legal position, further enquiry into the matter may now be necessary.
Counsel for the petitioner was emphatic that the effect of GO Ms No. 245 was to include 'Wanjari' as a part of the genus 'Sugali' which is undeniably a Scheduled Tribe and deletion of that caste by GO Ms No. 44 was illegal and violative of principles of natural justice.
I am of the opinion that the petitioner can succeed in this action only if it is made out that 'Wanjari' is a Scheduled Tribe either under the Presidential Order or under Act 108 of 1976.
Whatever the State Government has done, cannot confer the benefit of reservation which is meant exclusively for Scheduled Tribes on any community other than the one which has been so included.
If the State Government was not competent to notify a caste or tribe as a Scheduled Tribe, selection of one such from a State list can have no consequences on the rights of the petitioner, because the right for reservation can arise only from action under Article 342 of the Constitution and not by any executive action on the part of the State.
9.
The extent to which courts can examine whether a claim of a particular group going under a Caste/Tribe name other than the one included in the Scheduled Castes Order or Scheduled Tribes Order, issued under Article 341 or 342 of the Constitution of India had come up for consideration on a number of occasions.
10.
In Basvalingappa v Munichinnappa, AIR 1965 SC 1269, a Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court held :-  "It may be accepted that it is not open to make any modification in the Order by producing evidence to show (for example) that though caste A alone is mentioned in the Order, Caste B is also a part of caste A, and therefore, must be deemed to be included in Caste A."
11.
In Bhaiya Lal v. Harikishan Singh, AIR 1965 SC 1557, another Constitution Bench consisting of three of the five Judges who decided Basavalingappa, (supra) reiterated that :-  "In order to determine whether or not a particular caste is a scheduled caste within the meaning of Article 341, one has to look at the public notification issued by the President in that behalf.
Where, therefore, in a particular case, the notification refers to Chamar, Jatav or Mochi, in dealing with the question whether the candidate belongs to the scheduled caste or not the enquiry which the Election Tribunal can hold is whether or not the candidate is a Chamar, Jatav or Mochi.
The plea that though he is not a Chamar as such, he can claim the same status by reason of the fact that he belongs to the Dohar caste which is a sub-caste of the Chamar Caste, cannot be accepted.
An enquiry of this kind would not be permissible having regard to the provisions contained in Article 341."
12.
Yet another Constitution Bench in Abhay Pada Saha v. Sudhir Kumar Mondal, AIR 1967 SC 115 held that there was no justification to reject the claim of a person belonging to "Sunri' caste which was item No. 40 of part 13 of the Schedule to the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950, for the only reason that his name indicated that he was a member of 'Saha' caste, excluded by the entry, if there was no evidence that person belogned to the smaller caste group of 'Saha' which was so excluded.
13.
In Parasram v. Shivchand, AIR 1969 SC 597, a Division Bench of the Supreme Court held, after referring to Basavaligappa, and Bhaiya Lal, (supra), that it is not open for the court to scrutinise whether a person who is properly described as a Mochi also falls within the caste of Chamars and can describe himself as such.
14.
In Bhaiya Ram Munda v. Anirudh Patar, AIR 1971 SC 2433, a Division Bench of the Supreme Court held that the Election Tribunal was right in holding, on the evidence adduced before it, that the elected candidate was a Munda which was included as a Scheduled Tribe in the State of Bihar, even though he claimed to belong to a sub-caste of 'Patar'.
The Court held :-  "If patars are Mundas, because some sub-tribes of Mundas are enumerated in the Order and others are not, no inference will arise that those not enumerated are not Mundas.
We are unable to hold that because Patars are not specially mentioned in the List they cannot be included in the general heading Munda."
15.
In the Revenue Officer v. Prafulla Kumar Pati, AIR 1990 SC 727, yet another Division Bench of the Supreme Court held that 'Dhoba' being a Scheduled Caste "Rajaka' which is a synonym thereof also must be treated as Scheduled Caste.
The Court distinguished the observations contained in Basavalingappa, (supra) which we have extracted above on the facts of the case and held that even though the parties concerned described themselves as 'Rajakas' they were really 'Dhobis' which was one of the Scheduled Castes in the State of Orissa.
16.
In Srish Chandra Choudhary v. State of Tripura, AIR 1990 SC 991, a Bench of three Judges of the Supreme Court held that the Presidential Order under Article 342 of the Constitution of India was final and the Court cannot add or subtract any entry and that the jurisdiction of the Court is confined only to interpret what such entry means.
Reliance was placed on the decisions in Basavalingappa, (supra) Bhaiya Lal, (supra), and Parasram (supra).
17.
It is clear from the above decisions that the decisions in Basavalingappa and Bhaiya Lal which were rendered by Constitution Benches and which govern the field, have excluded any enquiry by this Court as to whether any caste or tribe not mentioned in the Presidential Order cannot be included by addition by the court to the Presidential Order.
It waas held positively in Parasram, (supra) that it was not open to the courts to scrutinise whether person who is properly described by one caste name also falls within another caste or tribe and can be described himself as the latter.
18.
Counsel placed considerable reliance on the decisions in Bhailya Ram Munda, (supra), Prafulla Kumar Pati (supra) and Srish Chandra Choudhary (supra) to contend that it is open for this Court to investigate the question whether the petitioner was entitled to be treated as belonging to Scheduled Tribe, notwithstanding the caste name.
He submitted that the Supreme Court in these decisions have decided that in spite of the use of particular name not included in the Schedule, the court did accept evidence indicating that such inclusion was necessary and justifiable.
19.
We are not inclined to accept this submission for more reasons than one.
We have extracted from Basavalingappa (supra), Bhaiya Lal (supra) and Parasram (supra) where the Supreme Court held positively that the court is not entitled to conduct an investigation to ascertain whether a person belonging to a caste other than the one which is mentioned in the Schedule can be treated as a Scheduled Tribe.
The decisions in Basavalingappa and Bhaiya Lal rendered by Constitution Benches of five Judges govern the field and contrary observations contained in Bhaiya Ram Munda (supra) Prafulla Kumar Pati (supra) and Srish Chandra Choudhary (supra) rendered by Benches consisting of lesser number of Judges cannot override the effect of the decisions rendered by Constitution Benches.
We are therefore not inclined to accept the submission urged by counsel for the petitioner.
20.
The same question has been considered by different Division Benches of this Court.
In South Central Railway v. B Veera Raju, (1991) 3 Andh LT 252 the Court held, on a reference to Bhaiya Lal (supra) and Parasaram (supra) that the Court cannot add to delete from or modify the entries in the Schedule attached to the Presidential Order, issued in exercise of the power under Articles 342 of the Constitution of India.
21.
In Vidada Sridevi v. Director of Tribal Welfare, W.P. No. 1275/92 and batch dated 681983 another Division Bench of this Court of which I was a party, held, following Bhaiya Lal (supra), Parasram (supra) and Kanungo v. Collector of Customs, Calcutta, AIR 1972 SC 2136, that the Court should be loathe to give a declaration of the caste of an individual as and included in the Scheduled Tribes/Castes and therefore refused relief.
22.
I do not propose to multiply authorities.
I am of the opinion that it is not open for this Court to conduct an enquiry simulating a research into the origin and genesis of the particular tribe for the purpose of discovering whether the claim of the petitioner to be included in the list of Scheduled Tribe, 'Sugali' even though she belonged to the caste 'Wanjari'.
23.
Counsel for the petitioner submitted that the competent officer having issued a certificate dated 2981978 and that having been accepted by the 2nd respondent in appointing her in the quota reserved for Scheduled Tribes, respondents are precluded by principle of equitable estoppel from seeking to terminate her services.
Counsel referred to the decision in State of Maharashtra v. Abhay, AIR 1985 SC 328 in support of his submission that grant of provisional benefits on the basis of certificate once issued and its unceremonious withdrawal subsequently was nothing but improper.
Here in the present case, petitioner was appointed with a condition that there would be verification on her caste status and her appointment was likely to be terminated if enquiries disclosed that she did not belong to Scheduled Tribe.
I have noted the fact that she was appointed only on 2441980 and was removed by the impugned order dated 21.11.81 within less than two years.
The mere fact that the petitioner could cling on to the post for about 13 years by reason of interim orders obtained from this court is no reason to apply the principle of equitable estoppel in her case.
We need only refer to the decision of Supreme Court in Vasantkumar Radhakisan Vora v. Board of Trustees of the Port of Bombay,1990(2) RCR (Rent) 454 : 1990(2) RRR 378 : AIR 1991 SC 14 to repel this contention.
The Court therein held that the plea of promissory estoppel should not be extended when it was obtained to play fraud on the constituion and its enforcement would defeat or tend to defend the, constitutional goals.
The Court held that if a wrong claim to belong to a Scheduled Caste or Backward Class supported by a certificate was found on enquiry, though belated, to be fraudulent, the plea of promissory estoppel could not be urged, and in any case, not accepted to sustain the fraud sought to be played on the Constitution.
I am satisfied that the proposition in the above decision does apply to the facts of the present case and I repel the plea of equitable estoppel in support of the claim of the petitioner.
24.
I have held that the State Government had no power to include any caste or tribe in the Schedule attached to the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950.
Reading GO Ms No. 245 Social Welfare dated 3061977, I find considerable force in the submission urged by the Government Pleader that order that did not include 'Wanjari' as Scheduled Tribe.
That order contained only guidelines as to the manner in which claims of persons belonging to Scheduled Tribes had to be ascertained for the purpose of issue of Caste Certificates.
If the effect of the order was not to include 'Wanjari' as a Scheduled Tribe by incorporating that as a 'synonym' of one of the Tribes included in the Schedule, deletion of that entry by GO Ms No. 44 dated 2321979 cannot be successfully assailed by the petitioner.
Nor do I find any defeat or violation of Principles of natural justice in the respondents issuing the order without notice to the petitioner.
It was a general order.
I also note the submission made by counsel for the petitioner that the petitioner produced her caste certificate, which was issued subsequent to the date of GO 44 i.e. 2321979.
The fact that the same was issued on the basis of the certificate issued by the Tehsildar, Medchal Taluk on 29878 is of no consequence, because the claim of the petitioner for appointment was based on the certificate issued subsequent to the date of issue of GO Ms No. 44.
I note that no procedural requirements of the relevant Government Orders were observed by the Competent Officer in issuing the Certificates dated 2981978 or 1841980.
The former certificate was issued on the basis of the report of the Patwari, Medchal village and Revenue Inspector of Medchal Circle, whereas the latter was issued only on the basis of the former certificate dated 2981978.
These facts make it clear that there was a deliberate attempt to mislead the authorities for the purpose of obtaining preference in public employment.
I am not in a position to countenance any submission for sustaining any illegal benefit obtained by the petitioner pursuant to such covert attempts.
25.
Counsel submitted that the petitioner who was appointed, had the legitimate expectation that she would be continued in service and termination of service has resulted in unjust deprivation of such legitimate expectation.
A few decisions are cited in support of the submission.
I am not inclined to consider those submissions in view of the fact that it is the admitted case that the petitioner was told that her services would be terminated, if it was found, on verification, that her claim as belonging to Scheduled Tribe was incorrect.
26.
Counsel submitted that but for her appointment in the reserved category, she would have otherwise been appointed during the period of over 13 years when this Writ Petition was pending in this Court, and therefore equity requires that she shall be continued in service.
I am not impressed by this submission.
The 2nd respondent may however examine the question whether the petitioner would have been appointed without the aid of reservation as a candidate belonging to Scheduled Tribe, during the pendency of the Writ Petition before this Court, had been she an applicant for any such post.
A decision may be taken on an examination of the relevant facts, within a period not exceeding two months from the date of receipt of a copy of this judgment.
If it is found that the petitioner would have not been appointed without the aid of reservation as a candidate belonging to Scheduled Tribe, her services may be terminated in due compliance with laws.
Even assuming that she is continued in service, it shall be made clear that her continuance in service is not by reason of her belonging to Scheduled Tribe, but only by reason of her belonging to general category and by reason of her merit.
27.
The Writ Petition is dismissed with the above observations.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.