GS Singhvi, J - Award dated 20.3.1985 passed by the Labour Court, Ambala upholding the termination of the service of the petitioner has been challenged in this writ petition wherein the petitioner has prayed that the impugned award be quashed and he be ordered to be reinstated in service with all consequential benefits.
2.
From the facts which have been brought on the record by the two sides it is revealed that the petitioner joined service of the Haryana Roadways at Kaithal on 781971 on being appointed as conductor.
He proceeded on four days sanctioned leave in the year 1976 but did not join for a long time.
The employer initiated an enquiry against the petitioner, which proceeded ex parte because the petitioner did not join the enquiry officer even after publication of a notice in the newspaper.
The Enquiry Officer held the petitioner guilty of the charge levelled against him.
Thereafter, the General Manager, Haryana Roadways, Kaithal, issued notice to the petitioner and called upon to him to show cause against the proposed penalty.
Even then the petitioner did not appear before the competent authority resulting in passing of the order dated 2371979 for termination of his service on the ground of absence from duty.
3.
The petitioner raised a dispute against the termination of his service, which was referred by the Government to the Labour Court, Ambala, under section 10(1)(c) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for short, the Act).
4.
Before the Labour Court, the petitioner pleaded that the employer had terminated his service without an enquiry held in accordance with the provisions of the principles of natural justice and that the punishment was extremely harsh.
The employer pleaded that the termination of service of the petitioner was preceded by a regular departmental enquiry and as the workman himself absented from the enquiry he could not complain of the violation of the principles of natural justice.
5.
After considering the pleadings and the evidence led by the parties, the Labour Court held that the workman had absented from duty for about six months without any plausible explanation and, therefore, the termination of his service was justified.
6.
Perusal of the impugned award shows that the Labour Court has not at all applied its mind to the settled principles of law which govern the adjudication of the reference made under section 10(1)(c) of the Act.
The Labour Court has altogether ignored that when there is a dispute between the employer and the employee on the ground of fairness of the enquiry, a preliminary issue is required to be framed to decide whether the enquiry held by the employer was fair and proper and whether an opportunity of hearing was given to the workman or not.
The Labour Court is required to give an opportunity of adducing evidence to the employer, if the employer asks for such opportunity in case the Labour Court holds that the enquiry was not fair or proper.
If, at all, the proceedings of the enquiry are held to be fair and proper, then the Labour Court is required to examine whether the findings recorded by the disciplinary authority on the allegation of misconduct are justified or not.
If the Labour Court comes to the conclusion that the enquiry is proper and the findings are justified, then it is required to consider whether the punishment awarded by the employer is just or not.
Section 11-A of the Act requires the Labour Court/Industrial Tribunal to go into the question relating to the quantum of punishment and if it finds that the punishment imposed by the employer is highly excessive or shockingly disproportionate, the Labour Court/Industrial Tribunal can substitute the punishment with a lesser penalty.
In the instant case the Labour Court has not taken any of the aforesaid steps and, therefore, the impugned award is liable to be quashed.
7.
Ordinarily I would have remanded the case to the Labour Court for fresh adjudication but after taking into consideration the joint request of the learned counsel for the parties that the remand of the case at such a belated stage would cause injury to both the parties and this Court itself should decide the matter, I have considered the entire case on its merits.
8.
The enquiry was held against the workman in accordance with the principles of natural justice.
Notice was got published in the newspaper.
Even then the workman did not appear before the enquiry officer.
Therefore, it is not possible to hold that the enquiry is vitiated due to violation of the principles of natural justice.
However, punishment of dismissal appears to be extremely harsh.
The workman was charged with the allegation of absence from duty.
There was no allegation against him of previous misconduct.
It is not the case of the employer that the workman has committed an act of moral turpitude.
This being the position, the imposition of penalty of dismissal from service is not warranted.
In my opinion, the ends of justice would be met by awarding a penalty of stoppage of two grade increments with cumulative effect.
This view of mine is in accordance with a series of decisions of the Supreme Court.
9.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is partly allowed.
The impugned award is quashed.
However, keeping in view the provisions of Section 11-A of the Act and the joint request of learned counsel for the parties that the matter relating to the quantum of punishment be decided by this Court, I direct that the penalty of dismissal from service shall stand substituted with the one of stopage of two increments with cumulative effect.
10.
In regard to the back wages, I find total absence of pleadings and evidence by both the parties.
Therefore, I direct that the petitioner shall be free to avail the remedy under Section 33-C(2) of the Act.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition partly allowed.