ML Koul, J - By virtue of writ of certiorari a challenge is made to the award dated 2051993 published in the Chandigarh Administration Gazette Extra, July, 1993, whereby the Field Workers working in the Engineering Department within the control of the Chief Engineer, Union Territory, Chandigarh, were held entitled to receive their revised pay scales with effect from 1st February, 1968.
2.
It was averred in the petition that respondent No. 1 i.e. the Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Union Territory, Chandigarh, who entered into the reference and passed the award has usurped the powers without going into scope of Section 10(1)(d) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as the Act) and had erred in deciding the dispute which fell outside its jurisdiction.
3.
The main controversy with regard to which adjudication is sought by the petitioner is whether the Labour Court is competent to adjudicate a dispute falling under Schedule III of the Act; whether the petitioner department is an industry within the meaning of Section 2(j) of the Act ?
At very outset it may be stated that the learned Labour Court has passed the award after the issues were framed and the parties had led evidence in the matter and they were heard.
On every count finding has been given by the Labour Court and it has found that all the people holding the posts of Chargemen (Civil) were equivalent to Chargemen (AC) Mechanical and the petitioner was bound to pay revised pay to such workmen-respondents, who were entitled to it, for the fact that the work-charge Works Inspectors/Chargemen who held inferior status and were much junior to the Works Inspectors/Chargemen have been extended this benefit from 1st February, 1968.
Once the juniors to the respondents were getting more pay as compared to their seniors, who had become regular under law, they were entitled to the higher pay and, therefore, within the terminology of the revised pay scheme they were entitled to receive revised pay from 1st February, 1968 instead of 15th August, 1972.
The petitioner could not controvert this merit of the case before the Labour Court, which on facts and legalities of the case found that the respondents were entitled to the higher grade from 1st February, 1968 and not from 15th August, 1972.
4.
The only point which assumes consideration for determination is as to whether the Labour Court has assumed the jurisdiction or powers beyond its competence for adjudication.
Once the matter was referred to it for adjudication, the Labour Court under law was bound to decide the matter on merits of the case, which is has done.
It is relevant to make mention of Schedule-II, which envisages as to what are the matters which fall within the jurisdiction of the Labour Court for determination.
Among other things it has been envisaged that the Labour Court can dispose of the cases which related to all matters other than those specified in Schedule-III.
In the Schedule-III, the powers of the Industrial Tribunals have been laid down and there is no clause under this Schedule wherein the Industrial Tribunal can bring under its fold any other matters than what are specified under this Schedule for its determination.
The fact that the Labour Court is entitled to deal with all the matters other than those specified in the Schedule-III, empowers the Labour Court to deal with a situation where the employees were demanding entitlement to grade from 1st February, 1968 when the grades were revised, instead of 15th of August, 1972.
It is an admitted case of the parties that the respondent-Inspectors at whose behest reference was made to the Labour Court were holding the regular posts and were senior to all those employees, i.e. Work-Charge Works Inspectors and Chargemen who were given the benefit of revised pay from Ist of February, 1968 and these Inspectors were not granted the grade from that date.
They had been discriminated against by the authorities and therefore, the Labour Court on all fours found that they were entitled to the revised pay like their juniors.
Schedule-II of the Act empowers a Labour Court to deal with all the situations which could not be dealt with by the Tribunal for whom the matters for which he could take jurisdiction are laid down under this Schedule.
The Act is a welfare legislation and we are not to be governed by the technicalities of the law.
Rather the substance of the matter is to be taken into consideration and a legal award passed by the competent Court of law i.e. Labour Court, cannot be deemed to be an illegality, for the fact that in technical terminology it is not covered by some particular Schedule.
The powers of the Labour Court are more comprehensive and it can deal with any of the disputes regarding which reference is to be made to it under Section 10 of the Act and the reference was made to it at the behest of the appropriate Government and both the parties were put to issues and the matter was finally disposed of on merits of the case.
5.
There is no illegality or impropriety found with the order of the Labour Court and it was within its limits to dispose of the reference on merits of the case.
No unconstitutionality or illegality is involved in the matter for which the writ jurisdiction can be exercised.
Hence the writ petition fails and is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.