VS Aggarwal, J - Des Raj Kataria (hereinafter described as 'the petitioner') is a member of Scheduled Caste.
He was appointed as Agricultural Engineer (Implements) in the Punjab Agricultural Service Class I on 861989.
As per the seniority of Agricultural Engineers, Petitioner is placed below Hardial Singh Dhillon, Amrik Singh Chakal, Balwinder Singh Sidhu and Bhupinder Singh Bhathal.
These persons are the members of general category.
The conditions of service of the petitioner and respondent No. 4 are governed by Punjab Agricultural Service (Class I) Rules, 1974 (hereinafter described as 'the Rules').
In accordance with these rules, promotion from the post of Agricultural Engineer is to the post of Joint Director Agricultural in the cadre namely, Administrative, Statistical and Engineering Cadres.
The appointment is by mode of selection from amongst Agricultural Engineers.
2.
Prior to 1982 there was only one of Joint Director (Engineering).
It was filled in the year 1976.
Shri SS Bains was promoted as Joint Director in 1976.
In the year 1982 a second post of Joint Director Engineering was created by the State of Punjab.
In this process, in the cadre of Joint Directors, there became two posts.
3.
Petitioner asserts that when there were two posts in the cadre of Joint Director, the policy of reservation became applicable.
The first vacancy was to be given the member of Scheduled Caste.
In 1985 the second vacancy was filled up, there was no member of Scheduled Castes available.
The said vacancy was filled up by promoting Shri SN Chaudhary a member of the Backward Class.
This promotion was made in accordance with the instructions issued by the State of Punjab that vacancies of Scheduled Caste and Backward Class are interchangeable, in case of non-availability of one of the candidates of either category.
Shri SN Chaudhary retired on 30.6.1993.
Accordingly, the said third vacancy was to be filled up.
The grievance of the petitioner is that it was a carried forward vacancy meant for the member of the Scheduled Caste but the State of Punjab treated it as an unreserved vacancy and prepared a panel of general category candidates.
Petitioner claims that he has a right, to be considered for the said post, being a member of Scheduled Caste.
It is to be treated as a vacancy reserved for Scheduled Caste in accordance with the instructions of State of Punjab.
Hence, the present petition.
4.
Needless to say that the petition has been contested, though with respect to the basic facts and the instructions there was a little controversy.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner relying upon the instructions of Government of Punjab urged vehemently that the vacancy which was reserved for the member of the Scheduled Caste had been given to a member of the Backward Class.
Therefore, next was a reserved vacancy and he has a right to be considered as such against that vacancy to the exclusion of a general category candidate.
6.
There is no controversy that in terms of the letter of the Government of Punjab dated 11101974, if there is only one vacancy, it is to be treated as unreserved.
But it would not be so if there are more than one vacancies.
Reliance is being placed on the instructions Annexure P-3 to urge that the vacancy that arose after there were more than one post in the cadre has to be made available to the member of the Scheduled Caste.
The relevant portion of the same namely paragraph 2 is reproduced below for the sake of facility :-  "2.
On receipt of reference from various Departments whether interchangeability of reserved posts was admissible in a Cadre of less than five posts only or was admissible in a Cadre of more than five posts also the concerned Departments were advised that interchangeability was admissible to a Cadre of less than five posts only.
The Government have now decided to allow interchangeability in all cadres irrespective of the fact whether the cadre is less than five posts or more than five posts.
The instructions issued, vide Punjab Government letter, dated 20th June, 1975 mentioned above are clarified as follows :-  (i) A vacancy upon its being de-reserved on account of non- availability of Schedule Castes person be offered to a Backward Class person but the vacancy so de-reserved would be carried forward for the Scheduled Castes just as is done at present.
(ii) The vacancy next reserved for the Backward Classes would in case a person belonging to Backward Classes has already availed of a vacancy meant for the Scheduled Castes be thrown open to non-Scheduled Caste.
(iii) The same conditions would apply to cases in which vacancies reserved for the Backward Classes are offered to Scheduled Castes on account of non-availability of persons belonging to the former category.
(iv) Subject to the instructions contained in Punjab Government circular letter dated the 30th July, 1970 the percentage prescribed for each category in a lot of 100 vacancies would not be exceeded in any case.
(v) In the case of promotion 2nd vacancy should only be given to members of Backward Classes if the Roster has crossed 50 points.
Similarly, in the case of direct recruitment 2nd vacancy should be given to the members of Backward Classes after Roster has crossed 20 points, 3rd vacancy after Roster has crossed 40 points and so on."
It is on the strength of these instructions, particularly paragraph 2(1) that it is being urged that vacancy was offered to the members of the Backward Class and now should be made available to the petitioner who is a member of the Scheduled Caste.
But the said instructions cannot be read in isolation, particularly when the defence offered is that when there is only a single vacancy in one year, it cannot be treated as a reserved vacancy.
To buttress the said plea reliance is placed on the celebrated decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Indra Sawhney etc. v. Union of India etc., 1993(1) SCT 448(SC) : AIR 1993 Supreme Court 477.
The earlier decision of the Supreme Court in the case of T Devadasan v Union of India, AIR 1964 SC 179 was over-ruled and in paragraph 98 the Supreme Court in Indra Sawhney's case (supra) observed :-  "In Devedasan's case the Court went into the actual, not into the hypotheticals.
This is most important.
The Court actually verified the degree of deprivation of the 'equal opportunity' right ........ ..........What is striking is that the Court did not take an academic view or make a notional evaluation but checked up to satisfy itself about the seriousness of the infraction of the right ...
Mathematical calculations, departing from realities of the case, may startle us without justification, the apprehension being misplaced.
All that we need say is that Railway Board shall take care to issue instructions to see that in no year shall SC & ST candidates be actually appointed to substantially more than 50% of the promotional posts.
Some excess will not affect as mathematical precision is different in human affairs, but substantial excess will void the selection.
Subject to this rider or condition that the 'carry forward' rule shall not result, in any given year, in the selection of appointments of SC & ST candidate considerably in excess of 50% we uphold Annexure I".
We are in respectful agreement with the above statement of law.
Accordingly, we overrule the decision in Devadasan (supra).
We have already discussed and explained the 50% rule in paras 93 to 96.
The same position would apply in the case of carry forward rule as well.
We, however, agree that a year should be taken as the unit or basis, as the case may be, for applying the rule of 50% and not the entire cadre strength."
(emphasis added)  The similar question came up for consideration before the Division Bench of this Court in the case of Prabhash Chand Jain v. State of Haryana and others reported as 1993(4) RSJ 720.
In paragraph 14 it was held as under :-  "In the present case, it is admitted position that out of the two posts, even one has not been given to a member of the Schedule Caste.
This is so in spite of the fact that the two posts have fallen vacant at least seven times from April 1, 1983 to July 15, 1987.
According to the instructions of the Government and the rule of law enunciated in Indra Sawhney's case (supra), the benefit of reservation shall be admissible in a year when at least two vacancies have arisen.
It is only in that situation that one of the vacancies can be filled up by promoting a member of the Scheduled Castes in compliance with the rule that the reservation should not exceed 50% in a year."
7.
In all fairness to the learned counsel for the petitioner, reference must be made to the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Arati Ray Choudhury v. Union of India and others, AIR 1974 Supreme Court 532.
Relying on the said decision, petitioner's learned counsel had attempted to bring home the fact that the present vacancy, though, it was a single vacancy in the year, should be given to the petitioner.
8.
To appreciate the said argument, reference can well be made to the facts of the cited case.
In the case of Arati Ray Choudhury (supra), the carry forward rule as amended in 1964 provide that "in any recruitment year the number of normal reserved vacancies and the carry forward reserve vacanices together was not to exceed 45% of the total number of vacancies".
It provided that if there be two vacancies, one may be treated as reserved vacancy.
But if there be only one vacancy, it shall be treated as unreserved vacancy.
The surplus of above 45% was to be carried forward to the subsequent year of recruitment subject to the condition that the particular vacancies carry forward do not become time barred due to their becoming more than two years old.
The Railway Board modified this in application to railway service.
A model roster was prepared .
125% of the vacancies were reserved for Scheduled Caste and 5% for Scheduled Tribes.
The roster contained an explanation that if there are only two vacancies which are to be filled on a particular occasion, not more than one may be treated as reserved.
If there is only one vacancy, it should be treated as unreserved.
In the financial year 1966-67 a vacancy of Headmistress arose.
It was treated as unreserved.
Another vacancy arose inthe year 1968-69.
It was contended that vacancy must be treated as unreserved being a solitary vacancy.
The background of these instructions is provded in paragraph 16 of the cited decision which is as under :-  "The decision in Devadasan's case, (1964) 4 SCR 680 : AIR 1964 SC 179, was rendered on August 29, 1963 and on December 4, 1963 the Ministry of Home Affairs issued a memorandum modifying the carry forward rule so as to comply with the decision.
By para 2 of the Memorandum (as amended by the Memorandum of September 2, 1964) the carry forward rule was amended by providing that "In any recruitment year, the number of normal reserved vacancies and the 'carried forward' reserved vacancies together shall not exceed 45% of the total number of vacancies".
Nevertheless, "if there be only two vacancies, one of them may be treated as a reserved vacancy."
Thereupon the Supreme Court concluded as under :-  "Though each year of recruitment is to be treated separately and by itself, a reserved vacancy has to be carried forward over 2 years, if it is not fulfilled in by the appointment of a reserved candidate.
The open class reaped a benefit in 1966-67 when a reserved vacancy was treated as unreserved by the appointment of an open candidate, Smt. Gita Biswas.
If the carry forward rule has to be given any meaning, the vacancy shall have to be carried forward for the benefit of scheduled castes and scheduled tribes until the close of the financial year 1968-69.
The Kharagpur vacancy was to be filled in on January 1, 1969 and hence it cannot go to the petitioner who, admittedly, does not belong to the reserved class.
The construction sought to be put on the rule by the petitioner would perpetuate a social injustice which has clouded the lives of a large section of humanity which is struggling to find its feet.
Such a construction is contrary to the plain language of the matter of the Railway Board, the intendment of the rule and its legislative history."
9.
It is obvious from the aforesaid that these instructions and the decision that followed was based on the decision of Devadasan's case (supra).
The same has since been overruled in the case of Indra Sawhney (supra).
The thrust of the argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner, therefore, loses much of its force.
Otherwise also as has been noticed above, in the facts, the one vacancy that was given to the members of the Backward Class after it was noticed that no member of Scheduled Castes was eligible, necessarily in terms of the model roster, the member of the Scheduled Castes would get the vacancy at its best at the fixed point when one vacancy arises in the year and not that in this process the second vacancy can also go to the reserved category.
If this plea of the learned counsel for the petitioner was to be accepted, the reservation would exceed 50 per cent.
10.
Consequently, the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Arati Ray Choudhury (supra) will not in the facts of the present case come to the rescue of the petitioners.
Since only one vacancy had arisen in the year, it in the peculiar facts cannot be given to the petitioner.
It would go to a general candidate.
We agree with the ratio of Prabhash Chand Jain's case (supra) of this Court.
11.
In face of the aforesaid, the inescapable conclusions are that the petitioner cannot claim the said single vacancy to be reserved for the Scheduled Caste.
As a consequence thereto, the petition must fail and is dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.