GS Singhvi, J - Education for all is the constitutional goal as well as social obligation of the State under Articles 45 and 46 of the Constitution of India.
In order to fulfil its social obligations, the State has established a hierarchy of schools and an endeavour is made to engage qualified and competent persons to discharge the duties as Teachers.
At one time, teaching was considered to be one of the most pious functions and Teachers were treated with reverence and respect in the society.
However, with the advent of materialism the value - system has been considerably eroded and the profession of teaching has been much defamed on account of its commercialization.
The mad race amongst the young generation to secure employment in Government service or its agencies has largely contributed to the mushroom growth of bogus institutions in the country which award fake degree/diplomas/certificates etc.
Although the recent past has seen some realisation by the University Grants Commission (for short `the U.G.C') and other such agencies to curb the menace of bogus institutions and fake degrees, threat to the system of education from these types of institutions has not receded.
Rather their number has increased and a large number of cases have come to the Courts involving candidates who have secured employment on the basis of fake degrees/certificates.
Sometimes, the Courts take strict view and refuse interference with the action taken by the Government to terminate the service of a person who has secured a job as a Teacher on the basis of fake degree/diploma/certificate, but at times this strict approach is tampered on account of consideration of humanism and the Courts give indulgence to the untrained Teachers by giving an opportunity to acquire the necessary training.
2.
The present one is also a case in which the petitioner has sought a writ of mandamus for regularisation of her service and though we are not inclined to issue any such direction but long service rendered by the petitioner for a period of almost 9 years is a factor which has weighed with us to give one opportunity to the petitioner to acquire necessary qualification.
3.
The petitioner who passed Giani examination from the Punjabi University (1979) and who claims that she has passed the Language Teachers examination (1982) from Gandhi Hindi Vidyapeeth, Prayag (UP) (for short `the Institution'), came to be appointed as Punjab Teacher on ad hoc basis on 871986.
She has claimed that in view of the policy decision contained in Annexure P.1 for regularisation of service of the ad hoc Class III employees, the respondents are duty-bound to pass an appropriate order for regularisation of her service and as the respondents have failed to carry out this duty, writ of mandamus be issued directing them to regularise the service of the petitioner.
Petitioner's plea is that she fulfils the conditions specified in order Annexure P.1 but respondent No. 3 has declined regularisation of her service on a wholly erroneous ground that the examination passed by her from the `Institution' is not recognised by the Government of Haryana.
Petitioner has cited examples of a large number of similarly situated persons whose services have been regularised in terms of Annexure P.1.
4.
The writ petition has been opposed by the respondents on the ground that the petitioner does not fulfil the qualifications prescribed for appointment as Language Teacher and, therefore, she has no right to be regularised in service.
They have pleaded that the examinations conducted by the `Institution' are not recognised by the Government of Haryana and, therefore, the petitioner does not have any right to continue in service or to be regularised in service.
Respondents have relied on a notification issued by the UGC which contains a list of bogus institutions and have pleaded that the Gandhi Hindi Vidyapeeth, Prayag, is one of such institutions and on the basis of a certificate issued by such an institution the petitioner cannot have any right to be appointed in the service.
5.
The first contention of Mr. Malik, the learned counsel for the petitioner, is that the qualifications possessed by the petitioner, namely, Giani Certificate and Language Teachers Certificate, are sufficient to entitle her to claim appointment as Punjabi Teacher and once the respondents have treated her to be eligible for appointment as Punjabi Teacher, though on ad hoc basis, the petitioner has acquired a legal right to be regularised in service from the date of completion of two years' service.
Mr. Malik pointed out that under the Punjab Educational Service Class III School Cadre Rules, 1955, Giani with S.T.C.
or OT Certificate are the prescribed qualifications for the post of Punjabi Teacher but after 1958 S.T.C.
or OT candidates are not available and the Government has been appointing those who possess Language Teachers Certificate.
Shri Malik argued that the Language Teachers Certificate awarded to the petitioner by the "institution" is sufficient to entitle the petitioner to claim appointment in the service and when other similarly situated persons have been regularised in service the respondents cannot adopt a different yardstick in the case of the petitioner.
Sh. Malik laid stress on his plea of discrimination and relied on three decisions of this Court, i.e., Sachida Nand Vashista v. The State of Haryana and others, 1985(2) S.L.R.
114; Jagat Singh v. State of Haryana and others, 1986(2) S.L.J.
131; and C.W.P.
No. 1404 of 1989 (Kiran Devi v. State of Haryana) decided on 741989.
Learned Assistant Advocate-General argued that the "Institution" is not recognised by the Government of Haryana and, therefore, the courses and the examinations of Gandhi Hindi Vidyapeeth, Prayag, cannot entitle a person to claim appointment in the service of the Government of Haryana.
Ms. Bahri submitted that in view of the notification issued by the UGC the petitioner cannot be treated eligible to be appointed in service and no writ of mandamus should be issued in her favour for regularisation of service.
6.
Consistency in the decisions of the Courts is one of the basic pillars of the foundation of the administration of justice.
Uncertainty or unpredictability of the judgments of the Courts does cause erosion in public faith and confidence in the judicial system.
Keeping this in view ordinarily we would have followed the decision of a co-ordinate Bench in Sachida Nand Vashista's case (supra).
However, after having carefully gone through that decision, we find it impossible to follow the same for giving relief to the petitioner.
Perusal of that judgment shows that Sachida Nand Vashista had passed examination conducted by the Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, Prayag.
He was appointed as Hindi Teacher on ad hoc basis.
He claimed regularisation of service on the basis of the policy decision taken by the Government of Haryana and as appropriate order was not passed in his favour he filed a writ petition and sought issue of a writ of mandamus.
When the matter came up for hearing before the Division Bench the learned Deputy Advocate General conceded that the petitioner was qualified to be appointed in service and that the decision taken by the departmental authorities was not justified.
The Court took notice of this concession made by the Deputy Advocate-General and specifically recorded that in view of the concession made by the Deputy Advocate General it was not necessary for it to make any further probe into the matter.
On this basis, the Court gave a direction to the respondents to regularise the service of Sachida Nand Vashista.
7.
In Jagat Singh's case (supra), it was urged on behalf of the respondents that the learned Deputy Advocate General had made an inadvertent concession in Sachida Nand Vashista's case (supra) and, therefore, the same was not binding on the Government in other cases.
A learned Single Judge of this Court negatived this argument and observed -  "Learned counsel for the respondents, on the other hand, contends that Sachida Nand's case (supra) was decided on the basis of a concession made by the learned Deputy Advocate-General before the Division Bench.
He contends that the concession so made was not based either on the written statement filed in that case or on such instructions according to which a candidate possessing the aforesaid qualification might have been eligible for being considered for appointment as a Hindi Teacher in the Haryana Education Department.
According to him, the statement was made by the learned Deputy Advocate-General inadvertently.
Be that as it may, it is admitted that the judgment is Sachida Nand's case (supra) though based on concession was duly implemented, and the services of the petitioner therein were regularised."
In Kiran Devi's case (supra), another learned Single Judge of this Court observed that if the petitioner was not duly qualified the question of regularisation of her service did not arise but in view of the concession made by the learned Government counsel the petitioner is entitled to be considered at par with others who were given relief by the Court in other petitions.
8.
With great respect to the learned Single Judges who decided the cases of Jagat Singh and Kiran Devi we are unable to agree with the view taken by them that a concession once made by the Government counsel in a proceeding is binding on the Government in all subsequent proceedings even though such a concession may be against the provisions of law or may have been made inadvertently.
In a given case the Government counsel or its representative may inadvertently or otherwise make a concession and the Court may decide the case on the basis of such concession.
However, the Government cannot be bound down or estopped from pleading that the concession was erroneous and that a subsequent case arising before the Court be decided on its merits on the basis of correct interpretation of law.
Even an admission made in a written statement by the Government in a given case is not binding on it in other proceedings if it can be shown that the admission was made under a mistaken impression or that such admission was contrary to the record.
Admission made in a written statement filed by the Government in a given case or a concession made on its behalf in a particular proceeding cannot be equated with an admission made by a private litigant.
The enormity of the Government work and involvement of innumerable personnel cannot altogether be ignored by the Courts and the Government cannot be bound down by an admission or concession made in one particular proceeding even though such admission or concession may be wholly erroneous.
This principle will apply with greater rigour where interpretation of a provision of law is involved.
Court is not always bound to accept the same.
At times the Courts refuse to follow the interpretation placed by the departmental authorities on the provisions of law or the executive instructions.
Therefore, an erroneous concession made by the Government counsel cannot be a ground on which the Court can refuse to make a correct interpretation of the provisions of law.
In J.K. Steel Ltd. v. Union of India and others, AIR 1970 SC 1173, their Lordships of the Supreme Court observed that the interpretation placed by the department on various sub-sections of the instructions issued by the department cannot be considered to be proper guide in a matter wherein the construction of a statute is involved.
In PC Sethi v. Union of India, AIR 1975 SC 2164, the Supreme Court held that the Government is not estopped from making a statement before the Court even though such statement may be contrary to the affidavit filed in connection with some earlier proceedings of similar nature or even an admission made in Parliament on behalf of the Government.
In Dr. NC Singhal v. Union of India and others, AIR 1980 SC 1255, the Supreme Court held that where the Government has taken a stand in its pleadings which is contrary to the rules, the Court cannot give relief to a party merely on the basis of the stand taken by the Government.
Record of this case shows that for recruitment to the post of Language Teacher the minimum prescribed qualifications are Giani and Language Teachers Certificate.
The Government of Haryana has issued instructions detailing the qualifications recognised by it for the purpose of recruitment in its services and the courses and examinations of Gandhi Hindi Vidyapeeth, Prayag, are not included in the list of recognised qualifications.
Annexure R.1 further shows that the UGC has cautioned various Universities and educational institutions as well as the Government against admission of students in the fake and self-styled universities.
At Item No. 8 of this document appears the name of Gandhi Hindi Vidyapeeth, Prayag, Allahabad (UP).
It is, thus, evident that in the eyes of the UGC the Gandhi Hindi Vidyapeeth, Prayag, is a bogus institution.
It is also clear from the record that neither the Government of Haryana nor the UGC has recognised the Language Teachers Examination conducted by Gandhi Hindi Vidyapeeth, Prayag.
There may have been some justification in the claim of the petitioner for recruitment to the service or regularisation in the service if she was possessed with the certificate issued by a University established by law in India or a Deemed University as defined under the University Grants Commission Act, 1956, but it is not in dispute that the petitioner does not possess such qualification.
For the purpose of recruitment in the service of the Government of Haryana or for regularisation of her service the petitioner cannot seek a writ of mandamus unless she is able to show that she possesses the qualifications recognised by the Government of Haryana.
When recruitment is made to the service of a particular State, the Government of that State is fully justified in insisting that the candidate seeking recruitment must possess the qualifications recognised by that Government.
Perusal of Annexure P.1 also shows that only those ad hoc Class III employees are entitled to be regularised in service who possess the prescribed qualifications for the posts at the time of appointment on ad hoc basis and as the petitioner has failed to show that she possessed the requisite qualifications, we do not find any substance in her claim that a direction be issued to the respondents to regularise her service only on the ground that some other persons have been given benefit of regularisation of service on the basis direction given by the Court or even otherwise.
9.
The plea of discrimination raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner also merits rejection because jurisdiction of this Courts under Article 226 cannot be exercised for commission of an illegality on the ground that in some other case a wrong action has been taken by the Government.
Writs are issued for enforcing the constitutional and legal rights and not for perpetuation of an illegality or violation of the provisions of law.
Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India guarantee equality before law but do not guarantee equality where comparison is sought to be made on the basis of an illegal action.
Therefore, even though the Government might have committed illegality in appointing another person as Language Teacher on the basis of the qualifications not recognised by the Government of Haryana, we do not find any justification to issue a writ of mandamus in favour of the petitioner.
10.
Shri Malik then argued that even if the petitioner is held to be not qualified a direction be issued to the Government for regularisation of her service keeping in view the length of service of nine years.
Another facet of the submission of Mr. Malik is that if the Court now declares the petitioner to be ineligible, she would be rendered jobless and as by now she has become over-age the petitioner would suffer irreparable injury.
We find no merit in the contention of Mr. Malik that an order for regularisation of the service of the petitioner should be issued only on the ground that she has rendered nine years service by now.
Regularisation of service of an ad hoc appointee ordinarily involves deviation from the statutory rules.
It is a sort of back-door entry into the service.
Regularisation inheres in itself violation of the equality clause enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 and, therefore, in the recent past the Courts have declined to issue writs of mandamus for regularisation of service cases where appointments are made in contravention of the rules or where the candidates do not possess the requisite qualifications.
Reference in this connection can appropriately be made to the recent decision of the Supreme Court in Jammu & Kashmir Public Service Commission etc. v. Dr. Narinder Mohan and others, 1994(1) SCT 626 (SC) : JT 1993(6) SC 593.
11.
In addition to what has been observed above, we would like to point out that regularisation of unqualified/untrained teachers causes serious injury to the society at large because students taught by unqualified/untrained teachers suffer injustice throughout their career and lifetime.
In C.W.P.
No. 8642 of 1994 (Om Pati and others v. State of Haryana and others) decided on 15.9.1994, a Division Bench of this Court highlighted the need for purposeful education and observed that those candidates who secure degrees/diplomas by unfair means can have no right to claim sympathetic consideration by the Courts.
In Andhra Kesari Education Society v. Director of School Education, AIR 1989 SC 183, their Lordships of the Supreme Court observed -  "Before parting with the case, we should like to add a word more.
Though teaching is the last choice in the job market, the role of teacher is central to all processes of formal education.
The teacher alone could bring out the skills and intellectual capabilities of students.
He is the engine of the educational system.
He is a principal instrument in awakening the child to cultural values.
He needs to be endowed and energised with needed potential to deliver enlightened service expected of his.
His quality should be such as would inspire and motivate into action the benefitter.
He must keep himself abreast of ever changing conditions.
He is not to perform in a wooden and unimaginative way.
He must eliminate fissiparous tendencies and attitudes and infuse nobler and national ideas in younger minds.
His involvement in notional integration is more important, indeed indispensable.
It is, therefore, needless to state that teachers should be subjected to rigorous training with rigid scrutiny of efficiency.
It has greater relevance to the needs of the day.
The ill-trained or sub-standard teachers would be detrimental to our educational system; if not a punishment on our children.
The Government and the University must, therefore, take care to see that inadequacy in the training of the teacher is not compounded by any extraneous consideration."
Once again in Ram Sukh v. State of Rajasthan, AIR 1990 SC 590, their Lordships emphasised the necessity of appointment of properly trained persons.
Their Lordships observes -  "The primary school teachers are of utmost importance in developing a child's personality in the formative years.
It is not just enough to teach the child alphabets and figures, but much more is required to understand child psychology and aptitudes.
They need a different approach altogether.
Only trained teachers could lead then properly.
The untrained teachers can never be proper substitute to trained teachers.
We are, therefore, unable to give any relief to the petitioners."
In view of the observations made by the Supreme Court and this Court, we find no justification to direct regularisation of service of the petitioner only on the ground that she has rendered about 9 years of service.
12.
Notwithstanding the aforesaid conclusion, we do find some substance in the contention of Mr. Malik that the petitioner should not be thrown out of service straightaway.
It is not the case of the respondents that the petitioner had played a fraud or had made misrepresentation before the departmental authorities for securing employment.
Therefore, before any decision is taken by the competent authority to dispense with the service of the petitioner, it is just and proper to allow the petitioner one opportunity to acquire the requisite qualifications within a period of one year.
13.
In the result, the writ petition is dismissed subject to a direction that the petitioner should be given an opportunity to acquire the requisite qualification within a period of one year.
Till then her service shall not be terminated.
In case she fails to acquire the requisite qualification, the respondents shall be free to dispense with her service.
14.
Before parting with the case, we consider it our constitutional obligation not to ignore the stark fact that various officials of the Government of Haryana have been instrumental in recruiting various persons who are not qualified to hold the posts of teachers.
It is, therefore, necessary that the Government of Haryana takes prompt steps for preventing such recruitment in future and at the same time take corrective measures to dispense with the service of the unqualified/untrained teachers.
We, therefore, direct the Government of Haryana to issue written instructions to all the concerned officers that in future no appointment be given on the posts of Teachers to the persons who do not possess the minimum academic training qualifications.
We, also, direct the Government of Haryana to take steps for termination of services of all those teachers who have secured employment on the basis of degrees/diplomas/certificates issued by bogus institutions like the Gandhi Hindi Vidyapeeth, Prayag and who have not completed three years service.
However, before passing any adverse order the competent authority must afford an opportunity of hearing to the concerned person.
15.
Those who have rendered service for more than three years' should be given an opportunity to acquire the requisite qualification witin a stipulated time and in case of failure of such persons to acquire the requisite qualification appropriate action should be taken by the Government to dispense with their service.
The Director Secondary Education, Haryana should send a report to this Court regarding compliance of this direction within a period of six months of the receipt of a copy of this order.
The Registrar of this Court is directed to send copies of this order to the Chief Secretary to Government of Haryana, the Secretary, Education, and the Director Secondary Education, Haryana, for compliance.
The file of the case be listed after six months in order to find out whether the respondents have complied with this order or not.