GS Singhvi, J - The petitioner, who is holding the charge of the post of District Food & Supplies Controller, has filed this petition for quashing of the seniority list of the District Food and Supplies Officers (for short `the D.F.S.O's) Annexure P-5 and for grant of consequential benefits.
2.
In response to an advertisement issued by the Haryana Public Service Commission in the year 1981, the petitioner had applied for recruitment on the post of DFSO The Commission rejected the candidature of the petitioner by treating him ineligible.
This decision of the Commission was challenged by the petitioner before this Court.
His petition was dismissed by this Court but the appeal filed by him was allowed by the Supreme Court on 741989.
The apex Court directed the Commission to consider the candidature of the petitioner for selection to the post of DFSO by treating him as qualified for the said post.
In pursuance to the direction given by the Supreme Court, the Commission considered the candidature of the petitioner and as he was found suitable the Government appointed the petitioner as DFSO sometime in the year 1989.
A provisional seniority list of D.F.S.Os was circulated by the Government vide Annexure P-4 dated 591991.
Therein the name of the petitioner was placed at Sr. No. 3 and those of respondents Nos. 2 to 11 were shown below him.
However, when the final seniority list was circulated vide Circular dated 1971993 the name of the petitioner came to be shown at Sr. No. 21 and those of respondent Nos. 2 to 11 came to be shown between Sr. Nos. 4 to 20.
It is this seniority list which has been made the subject-matter of challenge in the writ petition on the ground that the seniority list has been prepared in contravention of the provisions contained in the Punjab Food and Supplies Department (State Service Class II) Rules, 1966.
Petitioner's contention is that the impugned list has been issued in clear violation of rule 10 of the 1966 Rules because the Government has altogether ignored the merit assigned to him by the Commission.
Another ground of challenge is that before changing the position of the petitioner in the final seniority list the petitioner was not given any action-oriented notice and an opportunity of hearing.
Yet another ground of challenge is that the candidates belonging to reserve category are not entitled to be assigned seniority as per the roster points and in fact they are entitled to be placed in the seniority list as per the merit list prepared by the Commission.
Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 have filed separate replies to the writ petition.
The case set up by respondent No. 1 is that the petitioner, who was appointed in the service in the year 1989, has no right to be placed above the persons who were selected and appointed in the year 1981.
Respondent No. 1 has further stated that four vacancies were notified by the Commission in the year 1980 against which the petitioner had applied but not selected and those who were selected were given appointments, in the year 1981.
According to respondent No. 1, the Commission had placed respondent No. 4 last among the four selected candidates.
Subsequently, the Commission revised the merit list and placed respondent No. 2 at Sr. No. 8 but being a member of reserve category respondent No. 2 has rightly been assigned seniority over and above the petitioner.
Similar justification has been offered by respondent No. 2 in his reply.
Respondent No. 2 has pleaded that the petitioner cannot claim seniority over him because out of the four advertised vacancies one had to be filled from amongst scheduled castes and he being a member of a scheduled caste was entitled to be appointed in preference to the petitioner who was placed at Sr. No. 6 in the revised merit list issued in the year 1989.
3.
Though the learned counsel for the parties have advanced arguments on various facets of the rival cases, I am of the opinion that it is not necessary to make an adjudication on all the points raised in the petition because the writ petition deserves to be allowed on the ground of violation of the principles of natural justice and the directions given by the Supreme Court.
In this context, it is significant to observe that the Supreme Court had left open the question of seniority of the petitioner and had directed the Government to determine his seniority in consultation with the Commission.
The operative portion of the judgment of the Supreme Court dated 741989 reads as under :-  "The appeal is allowed, the order of the learned Single Judge as also the appellate order as vacated and the State Government and the Public Service Commission are directed to consider the appellant's claim for recruitment on the basis of the notification for recruitment.
In case the appellant is found qualified, he shall be selected for the post and duly appointed.
The question of appellant's seniority is left open to be dealt with by the State Government in consultation with the Public Service Commission.
The appellant shall have the cost of the appeal.
Hearing fee is assessed at Rs. 3,000/- to be recovered from the respondent-State only."
4.
The admitted facts which have come on record show that in the tentative seniority list issued vide Annexure P4 the petitioner was shown at Sr. No. 3 and all the private respondents were shown below him.
Apparently, the petitioner was satisfied with his position and he did not raise any objection against the tentative seniority list.
Others, including the private respondents, represented against the tentative seniority list.
The Government accepted such representations/objections and issued final seniority list vide Annexure P5 down-grading petitioner's position by 18 numbers.
However, before doing so, the Government neither gave a notice to the petitioner nor did it give an opportunity of hearing to the petitioner.
Even the copies of the representations/objection-petitions filed by the private respondents were not made available to the petitioner.
It is, therefore, clear that the petitioner had no occasion to know as to what objections had been submitted by the private respondents against his placement in the tentative seniority list at Sr. No. 3 and he had no opportunity to place his case before the Government and convince it that the position assigned to him in the tentative seniority list was correct.
In view of this factual background it has to be held that the Government changed the seniority position assigned to the petitioner in the tentative seniority list in violation of the principles of natural justice.
5.
Another serious error committed by the Government while issuing the seniority list of D.F.S.Os is that it did not consult the Commission in accordance with the directive given by the Supreme Court.
Learned Assistant Advocate-General was called upon by me to show any document showing consultation by the Government with the Commission before it finalised the seniority of the petitioner vis-a-vis private respondents, but the learned Assistant Advocate General fairly conceded that no such material is available on the record of the Government.
Thus, there is no escape from the conclusion that the Government has decided the issue of seniority of the petitioner in disregard of the directions given by the Supreme Court.
6.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed.
The seniority list Annexure P5 in so far as it concerns the petitioner and the private respondents is quashed and the respondent-Government is directed to make a fresh determination of the seniority of the petitioner vis-a-vis the private respondents and other affected persons after giving them a reasonable opportunity of hearing.
The Government should send copies of the objection- petitions filed by the private respondents and others against the tentative seniority list to the petitioner and give an opportunity of hearing to him as well as the private respondents before issuing the fresh seniority list.
The Government should also consult the Commission before taking a final decision in the matter.
This exercise shall be undertaken by the Government within a period of three months of the submission of a certified copy of this order and a fresh seniority list shall be issued within this period in accordance with the provisions of law.
Till then the petitioner shall not be reverted from the post he was holding on the date of the filing of the writ petition.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.