ML Koul, J - The petitioner was employed as PA-I (Personnel) in the Punjab State Electronics Development and Production Corporation, Chandigarh and was posted with the Director, Punjab Optics Systems Ltd On 2081993, at about 230 PM he along with his other co-employees entered the room of Mr. JP Shah, Director of the Company.
They had some altercation with regard to their pending benefits with the company.
The petitioner became violent and caught hold of the Director.
One of the companions of the petitioner pulled a chair lying in front of the table to the Director and struck it on his neck.
The petitioner is also alleged to have given fist blows to the Director.
2.
In this regard a case was registered and the trial was conducted in the Court of Sub Divisional Judicial Magistrate, Kharar before whom the case was compromised between the parties on 12th February, 1994.
3.
After the incident the petitioner was suspended and an enquiry officer was appointed to go into the charge.
A charge-sheet was framed against the petitioner, which was received by him but he did not attend the proceedings rather raised a defence that since the proceedings were pending before the criminal Court, therefore he could not participate in the enquiry and disclose his defence.
Various letters were sent to the petitioner but he did not participate in the proceedings saying that as the charges both in the criminal case and the departmental enquiry were similar, therefore, he need not to participate in the departmental enquiry till the criminal case was over.
He was lastly informed to appear before the Enquiry Officer on 9111993 at 1000.
A.M. to specifically admit or deny the charges levelled against him by the Company regarding the alleged assault committed by him on the person of the Director Shri JP Shah on 12.8.1993.
He was directed that in case he failed to appear to face the enquiry ex parte proceedings shall be taken against him.
The Enquiry Officer submitted his report and while accepting the said report, the authority concerned terminated the services of the petitioner on misconduct with effect from 27.11.1993.
4.
Having been aggrieved of the said order this writ petition has been filed by the petitioner seeking the indulgence of this Court for issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari for quashing the order of termination being illegal, arbitrary and against the principles of natural justice.
5.
In the written statement filed by the respondent the assertions made by the petitioner in his writ petition have been rebutted.
It was denied that the charges framed against the petitioner both in the criminal case and in the enquiry proceedings were the similar.
It was rather pleaded that the criminal charge framed against the petitioner in the Court of law was for having committed assault upon his officer whereas the charge framed in the enquiry was with regard to his misconduct that he had shown disrespect to his superior officer by way of committing breach of peace and acting in a very disorderly behaviour in the office of his superior officer.
Their criminal case was for committing offence under Sections 323/325 of the Indian Penal Code.
Thus, it cannot be said that the matters in both the cases were similar.
6.
Heard learned counsel for the parties and have also bestowed our thoughtful consideration over the record on the file.
7.
It was vehemently argued by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the allegations levelled against the petitioner both in the criminal case and in the departmental proceedings were the same and as the criminal case has been dismissed for the parties have entered into a compromise, therefore, it did not lie within the powers of the authorities to conduct an enquiry against the petitioner on the same charge and remove him from service.
It was further argued that there was miscarriage of justice that on similar charge which was subject-matter of controversy in the criminal case and in an enquiry as well, the petitioner has been removed from service while the criminal charge has been ill-founded against him.
8.
This argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner is not convincing for the Administrative authority initiating the departmental proceedings is not bound to wait for the verdict of a criminal Court but where a criminal Court had tried a person (Government servant) and acquitted him on merits, it may look improper that on the same charges the person could be held responsible for misconduct and removed from service.
9.
In the case in hand the position is different.
The petitioner was tried by a criminal Court of law but the case was not disposed of on merits and the petitioner did not get clean acquittal or discharge.
The case was compromised enabling the parties to maintain harmony between the employees and officer of the Company.
The petitioner in no manner was absolved of the criminal charge in the legal sense on the merits of the case and his misconduct as it was on the day when he committed an assault upon his officer and showed disrespect towards him remains the same till he was found guilty of misconduct after proper enquiry to have been conducted against him.
The petitioner was informed about the enquiry and he received notices as well as the charge-sheet and even then on some lame excuse he did not appear before the enquiry officer and face the enquiry.
The petitioner all along has shown disrespect towards the authority so much so that he in every reply showed disinclination to participate in the enquiry saying that he is not bound to expose his defence for the criminal case was pending against him.
The criminal case came up for final hearing on 12th of February, 1994 whereas the petitioner was discharged from his service for misconduct on 17111993.
May be, once the petitioner was terminated from service on a proper enquiry his officer thought it worthwhile to get the matter compromised and not to pursue the criminal charge for they may have not thought it appropriate to see that the petitioner is punished once again for the offences committed by him.
10.
The learned counsel for the petitioner raised another argument in defence saying that he was not supposed to appear for the departmental enquiry for the authorities did not pay subsistence allowance during suspension to him as is required under law.
It was further argued that as such removal of the petitioner from service on enquiry is against the principles of natural justice and therefore the same requires to be quashed.
11.
In this regard he laid reliance on Supreme Court judgment titled as Ghansham Das Srivastava v. State of Madhya Pradesh, passed in Civil Appeal No. 149 of 1969.
We have minutely gone through that case law and have found that their Lordships of the Supreme Court in that case have found that the appellant had made many representations to the Government and the Enquiry Officer that he was not being paid subsistence allowance and on that account he was unable to appear at the place of enquiry which was 500 miles away from the place where he was residing.
In that context their Lordships have held that as the petitioner for want of funds was unable to travel such a long distance and to face trial at a place which was 500 miles away from his house, therefore, the ex parte proceedings taken by the authorities were vitiated on illegality and on that score alone remanded the case for fresh enquiry to be conducted by the authorities.
12.
In the present case during the arguments it has been admitted by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the petitioner was living about 4/5 miles away from the place where the proposed enquiry was being held by the Enquiry Officer.
The petitioner had made no representation to the authorities that as he was not being paid subsistence allowance therefore, he was not in a position to attend the enquiry conducted against him.
Rather he all along raised a defence that as criminal case was pending against him on the same charge, therefore, he was not obliged to take part in the inquiry and disclose his defence.
13.
The ruling of the apex Court has no bearing on the merits of this case for the facts of this case are different than what were before the Supreme Court in the above mentioned case.
14.
There is no rigid or inflexible rule that finding of a criminal case is conclusive in every sense upon the Administrative authority.
If the finding is purely a technical acquittal or discharge the Administrative authority could punish a person on the same facts.
The Administrative authority can punish a person where the acquittal or discharge is solely based on some technicalities and the finding of the criminal Court in that manner will not weigh with the authority in enquiry proceedings with regard to the same incident about a person who has shown his dereliction of his duty and has been disrespectful in his official duty towards his officer and has shown utter misconduct while the officer was performing his duty in the office.
There is no worse incident than this where the petitioner requires to have been dealt with severely by the authorities and in the instant case the petitioner has been so rude that he did not even choose to reply to the charge-sheet or attend the enquiry at any time although repeated notices were sent to him but of no avail.
We feel this is the rarest of the rare cases where no soft attitude can be adopted by the Court even if some technical error in the conduct of the enquiry against him is found which we otherwise feel there is none.
The petitioner has not appeared before the enquiry officer on his own peril and consequently he has suffered and has been removed from service on proved charges that he assaulted his officer in the office while he was performing his duty, named him and beat him.
15.
There is no flaw in any manner procedural or otherwise in the impugned order and no breach of natural justice has been committed by the authorities in conducting the enquiry against the petitioner who was properly informed about the place of enquiry.
Charge-sheet was served upon him and he was also warned that in case he does not attend the proceedings, departmental action will be taken against him ex parte.
This petitioner neither attended the enquiry proceedings personally nor through this counsel.
Therefore, no alternative was left with the authorities but to proceed ex parte against him and the report submitted by the Enquiry Officer was accepted as correct and the services of the petitioner were terminated.
16.
There is no illegality or impropriety committed by the authorities in the matter.
Hence this writ petition fails and is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.