GS Singhvi, J - In this second round of litigation by the petitioner he has prayed for issue of a direction to the respondents to consider the total service rendered by him as qualifying service for the purpose of pension, gratuity etc. till the date of superannuation, He has also made a claim for counting of 5 years service under the Premature Retirement Rules, 1975.
Prayer has also been made for counting the period of leave as part of qualifying service towards pension, gratuity etc.
It has further been prayed that dearness allowance and dearness pay be counted for the purpose of pension and gratuity by declaring the instructions; issued by the Government to be illegal.
The facts of the case show that the petitioner was initially appointed as a Teacher by the Director of Public Instruction Pepsu, in the year 1954.
On the formation of the State of Punjab with effect from 1111956 the service of the petitioner was merged in the newly constituted State.
The petitioner was promoted as Master in Mathematics in the year 1960 after having been selected by the Punjab Subordinate Services Selection Board.
He was promoted as a Lecturer in the School Cadre on 1101966 and then as Headmaster with effect from 1221972.
With effect from 1.
10 1974 the petitioner was appointed to PES Class II (School and Inspection Cadre Men's Branch) in the grade of Rs. 400-800 after selection by the Punjab Public Service Commission.
He was posted as Deputy District Education Officer.
3.
Vide Government notification dated 15101974 (Annexure P1) the petitioner was appointed as Chairman of the Punjab Subordinate Services Selection Board.
The petitioner resigned from the post of Deputy District Education Officer vide his letter dated 2351974 and joined as Chairman of the said Board.
Subsequently, by another notification dated 2761977 (Annexure P.3) the petitioner was removed from the office of Chairman of the Board.
The petitioner was not paid pension and other retirement dues after his removal from the office of Chairman and, therefore, he filed C.W.P.
No. 4606 of 1982 and prayed for issue of a direction to the respondents to pay him pension, gratuity and pensionary benefits.
That petition was allowed by a learned Single Judge on 1191989 (Annexure P.4).
L.P.A. No. 2094 of 1989 filed by the State Government was dismissed by a Division Bench vide order dated 29101991 (Annexure P.5).
On account of non-compliance of the order of the Court by the respondents, the petitioner filed Contempt Petition No. 661 of 1992.
During the pendency of the contempt petition, the respondents issued orders dated 27.8.1992 and 2.9.1992 and made a statement before the Court that pension and gratuity due to the petitioner have been paid and consequently the contempt petition was disposed of by the Court on 22.9.1992.
The petitioner served a fresh notice of contempt by alleging that he had not been paid full retirement dues.
He filed a second contempt petition but the same was dismissed on 2781993 vide Annexure P.6.
The Court held that no ground was made out for initiating contempt proceedings.
However, liberty was given to the petitioner to avail the remedy as per rules.
4.
In this writ petition the petitioner has made a claim that his pension ought to have been determined by taking into consideration the fact that in the capacity of Chairman he was receiving salary at the rate of Rs. 1500 per month alongwith dearness allowance and since he has been treated as retired while holding the post of Chairman of the Board, the last pay drawn by him should have been taken into consideration for the purpose of determination of pension and gratuity.
He has also claimed that vide Government instructions dated 971985 (Annexure P.7) the amount of dearness allowance and ad hoc dearness allowance has been merged with the pay for the purpose of computation of pension in respect of employees who retired on or after 3131985.
The fixation of date has been declared to be illegal by this Court in C.W.P.
No. 6863 of 1986 and, therefore, the petitioner has a right to be paid pension by counting the element of dearness allowance and ad hoc dearness allowance (dearness pay).
5.
The writ petition has been opposed by the respondents who have stated in their reply that resignation of the petitioner from PES Class 11 was accepted on 2951975 and while calculating the pension payable to the petitioner, pay drawn by him as a member of PES Class II was taken into consideration.
Regarding the claim of the petitioner to be paid pension on the basis of his salary as Chairman of the Punjab Subordinate Services Selection Board, the respondents have stated that the petitioner got that pay in his capacity as the Chairman and not as an employee of the Punjab Education Board and, therefore, he is not entitled to treat the pay of the post of Chairman as the basis for his pension.
Respondents have contested the claim of the petitioner to be treated as continuing in service till 31101984 on the basis of the terms and conditions incorporated in Annexure P2.
6.
The first argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner relates to the claim of the petitioner to be treated as continuing in service till the date of his superannuation, i.e. 31101984.
The learned counsel argued that in terms of para 6 of the notification Annexure P2 the petitioner has a right to be continuing in service till the date of his superannuation and he is to be treated as retired from service on the date of superannuation and also that his service as Chairman or Member up to that date has to be counted for the purpose of pension etc. Mrs. Tuli argued that the petitioner has no right to claim continuance in service upto 31101984 because the petitioner had the option of making that claim in his earlier petition and that claim of the petitioner will be deemed to have been decided by a learned Single Judge as well as by a Division Bench vide Annexures P1 and P.5.
7.
A look at the prayer clause of C.W.P.
No. 4606 of 1982 filed by the petitioner together with orders Annexures P.4 and P.5 clearly shows that while accepting his writ petition the learned Single Judge had issued a writ of mandamus to count his service as Chairman alongwith the service rendered by him in the Education Department for the purpose of pension and other retirement benefits.
While dismissing the appeal filed by the State, the Division Bench gave the following direction :-  "We consequently find no merit in this appeal, which is hereby dismissed.
We direct that the retirement benefits of the respondent shall be worked out on the basis that he rendered qualifying service from September 6, 1954 to June 27, 1977.
The admissible arrears shall be worked out and paid to the respondent within three months from the date of the receipt of a copy of this order.
In the circumstances of the case, we limit the award of interest on these arrears from the date of the decision of the case by the learned Single Judge, viz. September 11, 1989.
The appellants shall pay interest to the respondent @ 12 per cent per annum from September 11, 1989 to the date of actual payment of the arrears.
Thereafter, the amount shall be paid every month in accordance with law.
We, however, make no order as to costs."
8.
It is not in dispute that the order passed by the Division Bench became final inasmuch as no S.L.P.
was filed by the petitioner or by the State Government against that order.
In view of the unequivocal direction given by the Division Bench limiting the claim of the petitioner to the counting of his service from 691954 to 2761977 for the purpose of pensionary benefits, it is no more open to the petitioner to now make a claim that he should be deemed to have continued in service till 31101984 and should be deemed to have retired with effect from that date for the purpose of post-retirement benefits.
9.
Second argument of Shri Sharma relates to the claim of the petitioner that his pension be calculated on the basis of salary last drawn by him as Chairman of the Punjab Subordinate Services Selection Board.
Learned counsel submitted that the petitioner would be deemed to have retired from service while holding the office of the Chairman and, therefore, while calculating his pension respondents should have taken into consideration the pay last drawn by him.
A look at the contents of Annexure P 2 together with Annexure P.3 shows that the petitioner was removed from the office of Chairman by giving one month's notice.
Para 6 of Annexure P2 shows that pension was payable to a person who held the office of Chairman on the basis of service rendered by him in his percent office.
The only benefit conferred by para 6 is limited to the counting of the period during which a Government servant has remained as Chairman or Member in the Public Service Commission.
Counting of that period for the purpose of grant of pension cannot lead to a conclusion that the holder of the office of the Chairman gets a right to have his pay as Chairman made the basis for calculation of his pension.
What the Court has protected in the previous writ petition filed by the petitioner is his past service for the purpose of calculating pension.
The post of Chairman is not a part of the cadre of the parent service of the petitioner.
Therefore, the petitioner has no right to have his pension calculated on the basis of pay last drawn by him as Chairman.
10.
Another argument of Shri Sharma is that the petitioner is entitled to benefit of the judgment of this Court in C.W.P.
No. 6863 of 1986 Shamsher Singh v. State of Punjab.
Shri Sharma argued that in view of the striking down of the date of bifurcation of the cadre of the pensioners for the purpose of treating the Dearness Allowance and dearness pay as part of the pension, all persons who retired from service prior to 3131985 have become entitled to the benefit of circular dated 971985.
Learned Assistant Advocate General has brought to the notice of the Court that the decision rendered by this Court in Shamsher Singh case (supra) and in other cases have been referred to a larger Bench for re-consideration and in a number of decisions rendered by the Supreme Court after the judgment of Shamsher Singh's case (supra) it has been held that the class of pensioners can be divided for grant of different benefits and fixation of date does not suffer from any irrationality.
She has referred to the decision of State of West Bengal v. Rattan Bihari, 1994(1) SCT 96 (SC) : 1993(4) S.L.R.
786 and Union of India v. PN Menon, 1994(4) SCT 91 (SC) : JT 1994(3) SC 26.
11.
Since the matter is under consideration before a larger Bench, it is neither proper nor justified for this Court to make any adjudication on the issue.
Instead, I consider it appropriate to direct that the petitioner shall be entitled to the benefit of the judgment of Shamsher Singh's case (supra) in the event of larger Bench upholding the views expressed by a learned Single Judge in Shamsher Singh's case (supra).
12.
Lastly, Shri Sharma argued that the respondents have not calculated the pension of the petitioner by taking into consideration his pay in the scale of Rs. 400-800.
Instead he has been given the benefit of pension on the basis of salary payable to him as Headmaster.
This statement of the petitioner has been contested by the respondents.
They have stated in para of their reply that pay of the petitioner as PES Class 11 was taken into consideration for calculating his pension.
No replication has been filed by the petitioner to show that in fact his pay as a member of PES Class 11 has not been taken into consideration for calculation of his pension.
Therefore, it is not possible to record a definite finding in regard to this claim of the petitioner.
Instead, I feel that the ends of justice would be served by directing the respondents to furnish him a fresh statement of calculation of his pension and if the petitioner points out any defect in the same by submitting representation, the respondents should rectify it by giving him appropriate relief.
13.
In the result the writ petition is dismissed subject to the following directions :  (a) The petitioner shall be given the benefit of enhanced pension in accordance with the judgment of this Court in C.W.P.
No. 6863 of 1986 - Shamsher Singh v. State of Punjab, in case the larger Bench approves the view taken by the learned Single Judge.
(b) Respondents should furnish a fresh statement showing the calculation made by them for paying pension to the petitioner.
If the petitioner submits a representation and points out any defect or error in the statement, the respondents should rectify the same and make payment of the amount, if any, found due to the petitioner.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.