GS Singhvi, J - These two petitions involve determination of a common issue, namely, as to whether the petitioners are entitled to be appointed as Assistant Food and Supplies Officer or Inspector Food & Supplies, and Taxation Inspector, respectively, instead of their appointments as Clerks.
Therefore, both these petitions are being decided by a common order.
2.
C.W.P.
No. 8933 of 1993 has been filed by Rajiv Kumar Sharma who possesses degree of B.Sc.
(Non-Medical) and who has claimed that on the basis of his academic qualifications he is entitled to be appointed as Assistant Food & Supplies Officer, being a dependent of late Shri JD Sharma.
The facts set out show that Shri JD Sharma was working as an Assistant in the Food & Supplies Department of the Government of Haryana.
While in service, he died on 29.8.1990.
Petitioner submitted an application for appointment on the post of an Assistant Food & Supplies Officer in accordance with the policy decisions of the Government regarding employment of a dependent of the deceased Government servants.
The Director, Food & Supplies, Haryana, recommended the case of the petitioner for appointment in Government service.
In his letter dated 17121990 (Annexure P.5) respondent No.2 wrote to the Chief Secretary to Government of Haryana that some relaxation will have to be given for appointing the petitioner as Assistant Food & Supplies Officer.
The recommendation made by respondent No. 2 was turned down by the Chief Secretary as would appear from Annexure P-6.
Thereafter, the petitioner's name was recommended for appointment on some other suitable post.
After some correspondence, the Chief Secretary issued directions vide Annexure P-11 dated 2211992 for appointment of the petitioner as a Clerk.
This was followed by order dated 331992 (Annexure P12) for appointment of the petitioner as Clerk in the Food & Supplies Department.
The petitioner joined service in pursuance of Annexure P12 but at the same time made representation Annexure P13 for appointment on a higher post.
This request of the petitioner has been turned down vide Annexure P-15 dated 3151993.
Petitioner has asserted that a number of other persons, who claimed appointment as dependents of the deceased Government servants, were appointed as Inspectors, Food & Supplies, but in his case respondent No. 1 has adopted a different approach and has denied him fair consideration for appointment on a post commensurate with his qualifications.
The petitioner has relied on a judgment of this Court dated 1471992 in C.W.P.
No. 179 of 1990 (Parveen Kumar v. State of Haryana and another) in support of his plea that respondent No. 1 does not have the power to adopt the methodology of pick and choose while giving him appointment on compassionate grounds.
3.
Respondents have defended their action on the ground that under the existing instructions absolute discretion vests with the Chief Secretary to appoint a dependent of a deceased Government servant on an appropriate post and that no one can claim appointment on a particular post as a matter of right.
Respondents have pleaded that the case of the petitioner was carefully considered at the level of the Chief Secretary and it was considered proper to approve the appointment of the petitioner on the post of a Clerk.
4.
C.W.P.
No. 9949 of 1993 has been filed by Bhim Sain with a claim that he has a right to be appointed as Taxation Inspector and that the respondents have discriminated him by ignoring his claim for appointment on the post of Taxation Inspector even though other similarly situated persons have been appointed as Taxation Inspectors.
Petitioner's assertion is that at the time of death of his father late Shri Sat Ram Dass, he was having the qualification of BA After the death of his father, the petitioner applied for appointment as a dependent of the deceased Government servant.
Petitioner claimed that as per his qualification, he should be appointed as Taxation Inspector.
Petitioner's case was recommended by the Department.
However, the Chief Secretary to Government Haryana sanctioned appointment of the petitioner on the post of Clerk in the Excise and Taxation Department.
The petitioner has referred to the order passed in the case of one Shri Narinder Kumar appointing him as Taxation Inspector.
He has also made reference to orders Annexures P.11, P.13 and P14 passed by the Government for appointment of Shri Dinesh Kumar, Shri Davinder Kumar Sharma and Shri Rajinder Parshad for their appointment as Taxation Inspectors, and has asserted that the respondents have discriminated him without any reason or justification.
5.
In the written statement, the respondents have raised the plea of delay and have justified their action on the ground that the petitioner was over-age at the time of his appointment as Clerk and also that he does not have any legal right to be appointed as Taxation Inspector.
6.
A look at Annexures P2 and P.3 filed along with C.W.P.
No. 8933 of 1993 shows that the Government of Haryana has adopted a policy of allowing ex gratia grant and other facilities to the families of the Government employees who die while in service.
Other facilities include employment to one or more members of the family of the deceased employee.
Vide Annexure P2 dated 22121970 the Government has laid down certain procedures for granting facilities to the dependents of the deceased employees.
Vide Annexure P.3 dated 13.7.1971 the Government has clarified that it does not intend to provide employment to the dependents of the deceased employees as a matter of course and that each individual case should be examined carefully and employment should be provided only if it is justified in order to avoid hardship and not otherwise.
The following extract from Annexure P.3 is relevant to the subject-matter in controversy and is, therefore, reproduced -  "I am directed to invite attention to the Haryana Government circular letter No. 9054-4GS-70/32230 dated the 22nd December, 1970, on the subject noted above in which it was indicated inter alia that one or more members of the family of the deceased employee would be considered for absorption in Government service, the relevant rules being released, if necessary and feasible.
In this connection the question as to the general policy to be followed in this behalf and the extent to which the rules should be relaxed has been considered by the State Government and it has been decided to make it clear that it is not the intention to provide employment to the dependents of deceased Government employees as a matter of course.
Instead, each individual case should be examined carefully and employment, which should be confined to Class III and Class IV posts, should be provided only if it is justified in order to avoid exceptional hardship and not otherwise."
7.
The policy decisions to which reference has been made above, clearly show that the Government has taken a decision to give employment to one or more members of the family of a deceased employee with a view to avoid hardship to the family of such a deceased employee.
The object underlying these policy decisions is to provide at least one source of sustenance to the family of a Government servant who dies while in service.
As a model employer, the Government has recognised the fact that if an employee dies during the course of service, his family faces extreme financial and other hardships and at times it becomes impossible for the family to bear the brunt of the loss of bread-earner.
In order to provide cushion to the family members of a deceased employee, the Government has decided to give employment to one or more dependents of the deceased employee.
The fact that employment is not to be given as a matter of course and that each individual case is required to be examined by the competent authority shows that the Government is not left with an absolute discretion in the matter.
Careful examination of each and every case necessarily involves scrutiny of the contents of the application submitted by a dependent of the deceased employee, verification of his qualifications, verification of his antecedents and also verification of facts regarding the availability of a post.
These steps are necessary to fulfil the basic conditions which should be satisfied for employment in Government service.
However, instructions contained in Annexures P2 and P.3 cannot be read as giving unbridled or unguided power to the competent authority to give employment on compassionate grounds according to its sweet will and choice.
Even the learned Assistant Advocate-General did not make a claim that any unguided or unchecked discretion vests with the competent authority to give employment to one dependent of a deceased employee on a particular post and deny such a benefit to a similarly situated person.
8.
The instructions issued by the Government were considered by a learned Single Judge of this Court in C.W.P.
No. 179 of 1990 (Parveen Kumar v. State of Haryana and another).
While taking note of the facts placed before him, the learned Single Judge held that there was no justification to deny appointment to the petitioner Parveen Kumar on the post of Inspector of Police when other similarly situated persons had been appointed as Inspectors.
The learned Single Judge held that the action of the Government was arbitrary and unfair.
In C.W.P.
No. 12498 of 1990 (Miss Shinder Kaur v. Punjab State Electricity Board and others) a Division Bench of this Court held that when dependents of two deceased Government servants possess similar qualifications, no discrimination can be made by the employer while giving them appointment on compassionate grounds.
Their Lordships of the Supreme Court in S.L.P.
No. 2517 of 1990 (Smt. Kamla Gaind v. State of Punjab and others) decided on 12.7.1990 (Annexure P.15) have held that the Government does not have the power to act discriminatingly while giving employment on compassionate grounds.
9.
As a general proposition of law, it is well settled that the State does not have any power to discriminate between persons similarly situated.
While recognising that the Government can classify a person or a group of persons with reference to the object of legislation or even executive action, the Courts have time and again held that such classification must have some nexus with the object to be achieved.
The theory of absolute discretion of the Government was negatived by the Supreme Court in SG Jaisinghani v. Union of India and others, A.I.R. 1967 S.C. 1427.
Ramaswami J: speaking for the Constitution Bench of the Supreme observed :-  ``In this context it is important to emphasize that the absence of arbitrary power is the first essential of the rule of law upon which our whole constitutional system is based.
In a system governed by rule of law, discretion, when conferred upon executive authorities, must be confined within clearly defined limits.
The rule of law from this point of view means that decisions should be made by the application of known principles and rules and, in general, such decisions should be made by the application of known principles and rules and, in general, such citizen should know where he is.
If a decision is taken without any principle or without any rule it is unpredictable and such a decision is the antithesis of a decision taken in accordance with the rule of law.
(See Dicey - "Law of the Constitution" - Tenth Edn., Introduction x).
``Law has reached its finest moments."
Stated Douglas, J in United State v. Wunderlich, (1951) 342 US 98, ``when it has freed man from the unlimited discretion of some ruler ....... Where discretion is absolute, man has always suffered."
It is in this sense that the rule of law may be said to be the sworn enemy of caprice.
Discretion, as Lord Mansfield stated it in classic terms in the case of John Wilkes, (1970) 4 Burr 2528 at p. 2539 means sound discretion guided by law.
It must be governed by rule, not by rumour : it must not be arbitrary, vague, and fanciful."
10.
This principle has been reiterated, though in different words, in EP Rovappa v. State of Tamil Nadu, A.I.R. 1974 S.C. 555; Ramana Dayaram Shetty v. The International Airport Authority of India and others, A.I.R. 1979 SC 1628, and in a large number of other cases, including the recent one in Kumari Shrilekha Vidyarthi etc. etc. v. State of UP and others, 1991(1) SCT 575 (SC) : A.I.R. 1991 SC 537.
In Ramana Dayaram Shetty's case (supra), the Supreme Court quoted with approval the following observations made by Mr. Justice Frankfurter in Vitarelli v. Seaton (1959) 359 US 535 -  "An executive agency must be rigorously held to the standards by which it professes its action to be judged......Accordingly, if dismissal from employment is based on a defined procedure, even though generous beyond the requirements that bind such agency, that procedure must be scrupulously observed.
.......This judicially evolved rule of administrative law is now firmly established and, if I may add, rightly so.
He that takes the procedural sword shall parish with the sword."
The Supreme Court also approved some of the observations made by Mathew, J, as he then was, in V. Punnam Thomas v. State of Kerala, A.I.R. 1969 Kerala 91 :-  ``The Government is not and should not be as free as individual in selecting the recipients for its largess.
Whatever its activity, the Government is still the Government and will be subject to restraints, inherent in its position in a democratic society.
A democratic Government cannot lay down arbitrary and capricious standards for the choice of persons with whom alone it will deal."
11.
A cursory examination of the facts of these two petitions in the light of the principles of law enunciated by the Supreme Court shows that while the two petitioners have been appointed as Clerks in their respective departments, similarly situated persons have been appointed as Inspectors, Food & Supplies and Taxation Inspectors respectively.
In fact, the respondents have not controverted the assertion made by the petitioners that similarly situated dependents of the deceased Government servants have been appointed as Inspectors.
The only plea taken by the respondents is that other persons have been appointed on the posts of Inspectors on the basis of the approval granted by the Chief Secretary to Government, Haryana.
How and in what manner the cases of the petitioners are distinct or different from the cases of those who have been appointed as Inspectors has not been explained by the respondents.
Total absence of any explanation by the respondents, coupled with their plea that appointment has been given as per the approval given by the Chief Secretary clinches the issues.
When the petitioners have placed sufficient material before the Court to show the irrationality of the action of the respondents, it was incumbent upon the respondents to place relevant material before the Court to justify its action of discrimination between the similarly situated persons.
Respondents have failed to discharge the burden which lay upon them to justify different treatment meted out to similarly situated persons.
Their plea that the Chief Secretary had the discretion to give approval for appointment of different persons on different posts and that no person can claim appointment on compassionate grounds as a matter of course cannot be accepted in view of the settled proposition of law that while distributing largess the State cannot adopt the policy of pick and choose.
12.
In view of the above, it is held that the respondents have violated the petitioners' fundamental right of equality before law as guaranteed to them under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
13.
No other point has been argued.
14.
In the result, the writ petitions are allowed.
The respondents are directed to examine the cases of the petitioners for appointment as Inspector, Food & Supplies and Taxation Inspector respectively and pass necessary orders for appointment of the petitioners on these posts within three months of the submission of a certified copy of this order.
The petitioners shall be deemed to have been appointed as Inspectors with effect from the date of their joining as Clerks in their respective departments.
They shall be entitled to notional benefits on the basis of their retrospective appointment as Inspectors and with effect from the date of this order the petitioners shall get actual benefits of the posts of Inspectors.
15.
Parties to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed