GS Singhvi, J - This appeal is directed against the judgment and decree dated 17.5.1993 passed by the Additional District Judge, Faridkot, whereby the appeal of the respondent against the judgment and decree dated 4111992 passed by the Sub Judge IInd Class, Moga, has been allowed and his suit has been decreed.
2.
While serving as a Conductor in the Punjab Roadways Depot at Moga, the respondent was removed from service by an order dated 2461988 of the General Manager, Punjab Roadways, Moga Depot.
His appeal was dismissed by the Divisional Manager, Punjab Roadways, Chandigarh, vide order dated 1321989.
The plaintiff-respondent filed a suit and sought a declaration that the order of his removal from service as well as the order dismissing his appeal are illegal inasmuch as they have been passed in violation of the provisions of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970.
The defendant-appellants justified their action by pleading that the impugned order was passed after giving reasonable opportunity of hearing to the plaintiff-respondent.
On the basis of the pleadings of the parties, the learned trial Judge framed two issues and after recording evidence of the parties it held that the non-observance of the provision of the Rules of 1970 is not by itself sufficient to declare the impugned order as illegal unless the employee proves that such non-observance of the 1970 Rules has caused prejudice to him.
The learned trial Court held that the plaintiff has not been able to prove any prejudice on account of violation of the Rules and principles of natural justice on account of non-examination of departmental witnesses.
The learned trial Court dismissed the suit of the plaintiff- respondent vide judgment and decree dated 4111992.
3.
Against the dismissal of his suit, the plaintiff-respondent filed an appeal which has been accepted by the learned Additional District Judge, Faridkot vide his impugned judgment and decree.
4.
The first contention urged by Ms. Tuli is that a regular enquiry was held against the respondent wherein full opportunity of hearing was afforded to him and, therefore, the mere non-examination of some witnesses cannot have the effect of vitiating the impugned order of removal from service.
The second contention of Ms. Tuli is that the respondent has failed to prove prejudice on account of alleged failure of the observance of the Rules of 1970 and the principles of natural justice and, therefore, the appellate Court was not justified in passing a decree in favour of the respondent.
Learned counsel for the respondent argued that the Inquiry Officer had exonerated the respondent but the disciplinary authority relied on the statements of two witnesses, who were not examined during the course of enquiry for holding the respondent guilty of the allegations levelled against him and that this action of the disciplinary authority was clearly contrary to the principles of natural justice.
Learned counsel argued that the very breach of principles of natural justice was prejudicial to the respondent and, therefore, the appellate Court was fully justified in reversing the judgment and decree of the trial Court and passing a decree in favour of the respondent.
5.
A look at the judgments of the learned Sub Judge, IInd Class, Moga, and the learned Additional District Judge, Faridkot, shows that Bus No. 3138 on which the respondent was Conductor, was checked at Bus Adda, Jagraon, at 550 pm on 541987.
Fifteen passengers were found without tickets.
It was given out that the respondent had collected the fare from the passengers but had not issued the tickets.
On the basis of the report of the two Inspectors, namely, Ujagar Singh and Gulzar Singh the respondent was placed under suspension and a regular inquiry was initiated against him.
The Inquiry Officer submitted a report dated 28.2.1988 with a finding that the respondent was not guilty.
The General Manager, Punjab Roadways Depot, Moga, did not agree with the report of the Inquiry Officer and referred the matter back to the Inquiry Officer.
Once again, the Inquiry Officer submitted report dated 351988 with a finding that the respondent was not guilty.
The General Manager did not agree with the finding of the Inquiry Officer.
He recorded a note dated 2351988 that the respondent was guilty of embezzlement of Rs. 60/-.
This was followed by a show-cause notice to the plaintiff-respondent with a proposal of his removal from service.
After the plaintiff-respondent submitted his reply, the punishing authority passed the order dated 2461988 for removal of plaintiff-respondent from service.
6.
It is clear from the perusal of the two judgments that before the Inquiry Officer Vijay Kumar was produced by the plaintiff-respondent as his defence witness and the said Shri Vijay Kumar had deposed that he had brought 15 Bhaiyas by the bus in question and that the tickets of these Bhaiyas were with him.
He had produced those tickets before the Inquiry Officer.
The Inquiry Officer believed the testimony of Vijay Kumar and held that the delinquent was not guilty of the allegation of embezzlement.
The disciplinary authority did not agree with the Inquiry Officer and relied on the reports submitted by the two Inspectors, namely, Ujagar Singh and Gulzar Singh.
The most interesting part of the case is that neither Gulzar Singh nor Ujagar Singh appeared as a witness before the Inquiry Officer.
Therefore, the report submitted by these two Inspectors could not have been relied upon by the disciplinary authority for recording a finding adverse to the plaintiff-respondent.
7.
The learned appellate Court was fully cognizant of the scope of the jurisdiction of the Civil Court in disciplinary matters as would appear from his following observations :-  ``It is true that the civil court is not to sit in appeal over the finding of the Punishing authority but I am constrained to remark that the view of the General Manager is not only incorrect but also perverse.
The genuineness of the unchecked tickets produced by Vijay Kumar before the Enquiry Officer, who asserted that he had shown these tickets to the checking Inspectors, could not be doubted because thereafter one more ticket of the same denomination had been issued by the plaintiff to another passenger.
The Inspectors did not record the statement of any of the passengers nor of the plaintiff that the said Bhaiyas were travelling from Ludhiana to Jagraon.
The mere fact that the bus in question was coming from Ludhiana to Jagraon could not ipso facto lead to the conclusion that the said passengers were also travelling from Ludhiana to Jagraon.
Vijay Kumar gave convicting and cogent reason as to why he dropped at petrol pump of Jagraon.
He had parked his tractor there.
Soon thereafter he reached at the bus stand to collect the Bhaiyas.
Since the tickets were with Vijay Kumar, it is not possible to believe, as observed by the General Manger, that these tickets could be found by the checking Inspectors from the person of the plaintiff.
That Vijay Kumar had 17 tickets with him further goes to make his version plausible and natural.
It is thus a case of no evidence against the plaintiff.
The General Manager has put forth untenable and unconvincing reasons in defence of his dissenting note.
There is another glaring defect going to the root of the case in the conduct of enquiry proceedings.
The Enquiry Officer did not record statements of Gulzar Singh and Ujagar Singh Inspectors.
The report dated 641987 made by them could not be read as their evidence before the Inquiry Officer.
Rules of natural justice demand that the Enquiry Officer should have recorded their statements and then allowed the plaintiff to cross-examine them.
Only on the evidence recorded by the Enquiry Officer could a finding be given against the plaintiff.
It has been held by Lord Denning M.R.
in Annamunthodo v. `Oildfields Workers' Trade Union, (1961) 3 All E.R.
621, as under :-  `Counsel for the respondent union did suggest that a man could not complain of a failure of natural justice unless he could show that he had been prejudiced by it.
Their Lordships cannot accept this suggestion.
If a domestic tribunal fails to act in accordance with natural justice, the person affected by their decision can always seek redress in the court.
It is prejudice to any man to be denied justice.
He will not of course be entitled to damages if he suffered none.
But he can always ask for the decision against him to be set aside.'
This ruling was cited with approval by our own Hon'ble Supreme Court in SL Kapur v Jagmohan, AIR 1981 Supreme Court 136 and it was observed that the non-observance of natural justice is itself prejudice to any man and proof of prejudice, independently of proof of denial of natural justice, is unnecessary."
In my opinion, the finding recorded by the learned appellate Court does not suffer from any legal infirmity.
The learned Appellate Judge has rightly held that non-observance of principles of natural justice is itself a prejudice and no further proof is required.
I do not find any ground to disagree with the conclusions recorded by the learned appellate Court.
This regular second appeal is, therefore, held to be without substance and is, therefore, dismissed.
Parties are left to bear their own costs in so far as this appeal is concerned.