AK Mathur, J - The petitioner by this petition, has prayed that the orders (Annexure P4 and P5) passed by the Labour Court and the Industrial Court may be modified and the petitioner may be given full back-wages.
2.
The petitioner was an employee of the Weaving Department, JC Mills, for number of years.
The petitioner was posted in `E' shift of that Mill.
The respondent No.1 all of a sudden, discharged the petitioner from service by order dated 21.5.1975.
It is alleged that in fact, the aforesaid discharge order was a dismissal order.
The said order of discharge was purported to have been passed under Clause 11 of the certified Standard Standing Orders framed under the Industrial Employment Standing Orders Act, 1961.
It is alleged that serious allegations were made against the petitioner; but no domestic enquiry was conducted.
This order was challenged by presenting an application under Sections 31 & 61 of the MP Industrial Relations Act, 1960 (hereinafter referred to as the `Act').
It is alleged that on 21.5.1975, when advances were being distributed to the workers of the factory, he was also paid the advances viz. Rs. 200/- for himself and Rs. 150/- for Ram Bharose on the basis of his authorisation certificate.
On receipt of the said amount, he counted the notes and he found that 7 notes of Rs. 10/- were spoiled.
The petitioner then came to the Cashier, who was distributing the amount on the window.
The Cashier gave fresh notes and he put them in his pocket and as soon as he came back at the place of his work and counted it, he found that the Cashier had wrongly paid 10 notes of Rs. 10/- instead of 7 notes of Rs. 10/-.
The petitioner reported the matter to the Cashier and returned Rs. 30/- to the Cashier.
But the Cashier started accusing the petitioner saying that he had paid two notes of Rs. 100/- denomination.
Thereafter, the money was counted and it was found that there were only Rs. 230/- in his pocket.
But the search of the amount in the hands of the Cashier was not taken or the money which was lying in the custody of the Cashier was not counted.
All of a sudden, an order of discharge was passed holding the petitioner guilty of dishonestly receiving Rs. 200/- from the Cashier.
3.
The matter was taken up before the Labour Court and the management tried to justify the discharge order before the Labour Court.
The Labour Court permitted the Management to adduce evidence in support of their written statement.
The Labour Court after hearing both the parties, passed an order dated 1991981 (Annexure P-4) holding the petitioner guilty; but instead of passing the order of dismissal as a major punishment being excessive, directed the respondents to reinstate the petitioner without payment of back wages.
4.
Thereafter, the petitioner preferred a revision before the Industrial Tribunal against the order of Labour Court, for modification for allowing the petitioner full back wages.
The respondent/management also preferred a revision against the order passed by the Labour Court challenging that part of the order where the Labour Court had given a direction to reinstate the petitioner.
The Industrial Court dismissed both the revisions and upheld the order of the Labour Court granting reinstatement of the petitioner without back wages.
Aggrieved against this order (Annexure P-5), the petitioner has filed the present writ petition claiming that he should be given full back- wages.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has only prayed consequential relief that he should be given the wages from the date the order of discharge was passed i.e. on 21.5.1975 till the Labour Court passed the order holding the petitioner guilty of misconduct by the order dated 1991981 (Annexure P4), as during this period, the order passed by the Management was illegal and void.
Shri Upadhyaya, learned counsel for the petitioner, in support of this contention relied on the decisions of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Gujarat Steel Tubes Ltd v. Gujarat Steel Tubes Mazdoor Sabha, AIR 1980 SC 1896 and Desh Raj Gupta v. Industrial Tribunal, (1991(1) SCT 86 (SC) : (AIR 1990 SC 2174), and prayed that the wages for the aforesaid period should be given to the incumbent because at the time the discharge order was passed, which was totally void in breach of principles of natural justice.
As against this, the learned counsel for the respondent, Shri PL Dubey, has stranueously urged that the concept of relate back is applicable and once the Labour Court has found the petitioner guilty of misconduct and that misconduct will relate back.
once the petitioner has been found guilty of misconduct then the order of discharge passed by the management stood justified and the petitioner is not entitled to any benefit of back wages.
In this connection, the learned counsel has relied on the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of PH Kalyani v. M/s Air France, Calcutta, (AIR 1963 SC 1756).
Learned counsel has submitted that where there is no enquiry it is a defective enquiry and, therefore, the management has right to lead the evidence and in support of this preposition, the learned counsel has invited my attention to various decisions of Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Burn & Co v. Their Employees, (AIR 1957 SC 38); Phulbari Tea Estate v. Its Workmen, (AIR 1959 SC 1111); Punjab National Bank v. AIPNBE Federation, (AIR 1960 SC 160); Ritz Theatre (Pt.) Ltd. v. Its Workmen, (AIR 1963 SC 295); UB Butt & Co v. Its Workmen, (AIR 1963 SC 411); Workmen of the Motipur Sugar Factory v. Motipur Sugar Factory, (AIR 1965 SC 1803) and OTF Mills Amritsar v. Labour Court, (AIR 1972 SC 277).
6.
The point that whether no enquiry is an defective enquiry or not, is not of much consequence in the present controversy.
No enquiry was held against the petitioner the resultant position is that there is a defective enquiry and management has right to lead the fresh evidence to justify the allegation against the incumbent.
The right of management is to lead evidence before the Labour Court to justify the guilt of misconduct of the incumbent is not disputed; therefore, it is not necessary to go into this enquiry and reference of all these cases are not relevant for our purposes in the present case.
The present case is only a case in which incumbent was originally discharged from service illegally and, thereafter the management justified the discharge after leading evidence before the Labour Court then during this period the petitioner is entitled to wages or not.
This question has been answered directly by two decisions of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Gujarat Steel Tubes and Deshraj Gupta, (Supra), as mentioned above.
Shri Dubey, learned counsel for the respondent, has submitted that a Constitution Bench Judgment of Kalyani, (Supra) was not considered.
This is not correct.
The Constitution Bench decision was noticed and discussed.
In the case of Kalyani (Supra), the Constitutional Bench has observed as under :-  ``If the inquiry is defective for any reason, the Labour Court would also have to consider for itself on the evidence adduced before it whether the dismissal was justified.
However, on coming to the conclusion on its own appraisal of evidence adduced before it that the dismissal was justified its approval of the order or dismissal made by the employer in a defective inquiry would still relate back to the date when the order was made."
These observations though apparently run counter to both the recent decisions of their Lordships of the Supreme Court; but PH Kalyani's case was specifically considered by the Supreme Court in the case of Gujarat Steel Tubes Ltd, (Supra), and the Lordships has to comment over this judgment in following terms in para 152 which reads as under :-  ``Kalyani (1963) 1 Lab LJ 679: (AIR 1963 SC 1756) was cited to support the view of relation back of the Award to the date of the employer's termination orders.
We do not agree that the ratio of Kalyani corroborates the proposition propounded.
Jurisprudentially, approval is not creative but confirmatory and therefore relates back.
A void dismissal is just void and does not exist.
If the Tribunal, for the first time, passes an order recording a finding of misconduct and thus breathes life into the dead shell of the Management's order, predating of the nativity does not arise.
The reference to Sasa Musa, (AIR 1959 SC 923) in Kalyani enlightens this position.
The latter case of DC Roy v. Presiding Officer, MP Industrial Court, Indore (Supra) specifically refers to Kalyani's case and Sasa Musa's case and holds that where the Management discharges a workman by an order which is void for want of an enquiry or for blatant violation of rules of natural justice, the relation-back doctrine cannot be invoked.
The jurisprudential difference between a void order, which by a subsequent judicial resuscitation comes into being de novo, and an order, which may suffer from some defects but is not still-born or void and all that is needed in the law to make it good is a subsequent approval by a tribunal which is granted, cannot be obfuscated."
Therefore, the Lordships of the Supreme Court have clarified the decision given in the case of Kalyani (Supra) and it is not for this Court now to sit over the wisdom of their Lordships and to comment.
This judgment was followed subsequently by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Desh Raj Gupta (Supra).
Their Lordships relied on Gujarat Steel Tube Ltd's, case while disposing the case of Desh Raj Gupta (Supra).
Their Lordships have observed as under:  ``The second ground urged in support of the appeal appears to be well founded.
The learned counsel is right in relying on the observations in Gujarat Steel Tubes Ltd v. Gujarat Steel Tubes Mazdoor Sabha, (1980) 2 SCR 146 at P.215 : (AIR 1980 SC 1896 at P.1933), that if the order of punishment passed by the management is upheld subsequently by a labour Tribunal, the date of dismissal cannot relate back to the date of illegal order of employer.
The appellant is, therefore, entitled to his salary from 1681976 to 2071980 and the entire amount should be paid by the respondent Bank within a period of three months from today.
If the amount is not paid or offered to the appellant as directed, the respondent Bank will be liable to pay interest thereon at the rate of 12% per annum for the future period commencing on the date of expiry of three months from today till the same is realised."
Thus here is no scope for this Court to take the contrary view, now.
7.
In the present case, it is a fact that no domestic enquiry against the petitioner was held and, therefore, the Management was given an opportunity by the Labour Court to lead the evidence so as to bring home the guilt of the petitioner/workman and Management justified before the Labour Court after leading the evidence of misconduct of the petitioner.
But looking to the past 20 years of service of the petitioner, the Labour Court did not pass the order of removal and granted reinstatement but without any benefit of back-wages.
But the Hon'ble Supreme Court in identical situation, took the view that the incumbent will be entitled to the benefit of salary from the period i.e. the date of order of discharge till the date of the order of the Labour Court when the order is justified before the Labour.
To borrow the words of their Lordships of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Gujarat Steel Tube Ltd, (Supra), that ``a void dismissal is just, void and does not exist".
Therefore, in the present case, the dismissal is void ab initio as it was in the breach of principles of natural justice but a fresh breath was infused by the Labour Court when it found the incumbent guilty of misconduct.
Therefore, in this view of the matter, I allow this petition and direct the respondents to pay the wages to petitioner from the date of his discharge i.e. 21.5.1975 till the order passed by the Labour Court i.e. 1991981.
The respondents are also directed to pay the wages for the aforesaid period within a period of three months from today and in the event of non-payment, the petitioner is entitled to the interest at the rate of 12% per annum.
The amount of security deposited if any, shall be refunded to the petitioner.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.