GS Singhvi, VS Brar, JJ.
- Award dated 511994 passed by the Labour Court, Patiala in reference case No. 554 of 1990 is under challenge in this petition filed by the workman Gurmail Singh.
2.
In respect of some allegations of misconduct, the workman was proceeded against is a criminal Court as well as before the Arbitrator.
The court case resulted in favour of the petitioner with his acquittal which, according to admitted position of the parties, was founded on the benefit of doubt extended to the petitioner.
In the arbitration proceedings, an award was made against the petitioner and Chhaju Singh, directing them to deposit price of 100 bags of fertilizer, which they had allegedly given to one Nirmal Singh of Tohana.
In compliance of the arbitration award, the workman had deposited a sum of Rs. 5875/- being 50 per cent of the price of the bags of fertilizer.
Thereafter, the employer terminated the services of the petitioner, though without any enquiry.
An industrial dispute raised by the workman was referred by the Government of Punjab under Section 10 (1) (c) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 to the Labour Court, Patiala for adjudication.
Thereafter, the employer made an application for permission to lead evidence in support of the allegations of misconduct.
This request of the employer was accepted and parties were allowed to lead evidence in support of their respective cases.
The Labour Court analysed the evidence produced before it and recorded a finding that allegations of misconduct levelled against the workman stand proved.
The Labour Court also considered the submission made by the representative of the workman about the applicability of Section 11 (A) of the Act but declined to give any relief to the workman.
On the basis of its finding in relation to the allegations of misconduct, the Labour Court declared that the workman was not entitled to any relief.
3.
In support of the writ petition, three-fold contentions have been advanced by Shri Palli, learned counsel for the petitioner.
His first argument is that the findings recorded by the Labour Court on the various allegations of misconduct levelled against the petitioner are perverse.
Learned counsel submitted that no evidence was produced before the Labour Court to prove guilt of the petitioner in respect of the charge of handing over 100 bags of fertilizer to Nirmal Singh.
Shri Palli vehemently argued that when the workman was acquitted in criminal case instituted against him, the Labour Court could not hold him guilty of the charge of transfer of 100 bags of fertilizer.
We are totally unimpressed with the submission of Shri Palli.
The finding recorded by the Court in the criminal case, resulting in acquittal of the petitioner, does not relate to the merit of the allegations.
It has not been held by the Court that the incident of transfer of 100 bags of fertilizer to Nirmal Singh did not take place.
Rather, the Court has given the benefit of doubt to the petitioner.
Such acquittal of the petitioner could not operate as a bar to the departmental proceedings.
If the employer had made inquiry and held the workman guilty, no exception could have been taken to the action of employer.
Therefore, the Labour Court was also entitled to rely on other evidence to hold that the charge is proved against the petitioner.
The Labour Court has also taken note of the arbitration proceedings and in our opinion, it has rightly recorded a finding that the petitioner was guilty of transferring of 100 bags of fertilizer to Nirmal Singh.
The finding recorded by the Labour Court in our opinion is based on legally admissible evidence and a mere possibility of this Court recording a different finding does not give jurisdiction to this Court to interfere with such finding in exercise of its certiorari jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution  4.
We are also of the view that in face of the findings of guilt in relation to the charge of transferring of 100 bags of fertilizer, it is not necessary for us to deal in details the findings recorded by the Labour Court in respect of other charges.
Moreover, the findings recorded by the Labour Court are based on a proper evaluation of evidence and the same are not perverse.
Therefore, there is no ground to interfere with the findings recorded by the Labour Court.
5.
The second contention urged by Shri Palli is that even though the charge of misappropriation of the funds of the Society may have been proved against the petitioner, the Labour Court should have exercised its power under Section 11-A of the Industrial Disputes Act in favour of the workman.
We have made a mention of this contention of Shri Palli only to reject it summarily.
Every public servant holds a public post as a trustee of public confidence and faith and once he is held guilty of committing breach of this trust or faith, he loses the right to continue in service.
Courts of law do protect the employee against the arbitrary acts of the employer, but if, employee is found guilty of misappropriation, fraud, embezzlement, cheating etc., he has no right to serve as public employee.
Therefore, the Labour Court was justified in not exercising its jurisdiction under Section 11-A of the Act in favour of the petitioner and there is no illegality in the view taken by the Labour Court that the punishment of dismissal meted out to the petitionr does not call for any change.
6.
The last contention of Shri Palli is that even if the findings recorded by the Labour Court in respect of charges levelled against the petitioner are held to be correct and even if provisions of Section 11-A cannot be invoked in favour of the petitioner for modification of the punishment, the petitioner is entitled to wages till the date of publication of the award.
Shri Palli's contention is that punishment awarded to the petitioner cannot relate back to the date of action taken by the employer.
This argument has not been seriously contested by the learned counsel for respondent No. 2.
We are also of the opinion that the award passed by the Labour Court will operate only from the date of publication of the award and not from the date when the employer terminated the services of the petitioner.
This principle of law is clearly borne out from the Supreme Court decisions in Gujarat Steel Tubes Ltd etc. v. Gujarat Steel Tubes Mazdoor Sabha and others, A.I.R. 1980 SC 1896 and Desh Raj Gupta v. Industrial Tribunal IV.
U.P., Lucknow and another, 1991(1) SCT 86 (SC) : A.I.R. 1990 SC 2174.
This Court has also held that the theory of relation back is not applicable in such cases, as would appear from the order dated 12.8.1986 passed in C.W.P.
No. 2212 of 1986 Zora Singh v. Koop Kalan Co-operative Agriculture Service Society and order dated 121994 passed in C.W.P.
3703 of 1993 Gugan Ram v. Presiding Officer, 1994(2) SCT 521 (SC).
7.
Learned counsel for respondent No. 2 pointed out that after the termination of his services, the petitioner was gainfully employed.
He has drawn our attention to the statement made by the petitioner, wherein he has admitted that he was gainfully employed for a period of 8 months at Sahid Bhai Man Singh Academy, Mandwri.
8.
In the result, we partly allow the petition and direct that the petitioner shall be paid salary and other monetary benefits between 1321990 and the date of publication of the award i.e. 15.4.1994.
The respondent No. 2 shall make payment of this amount to the petitioner within a period of four months of the submission of the certified copies of this order after deducting a sum of Rs. 9,600/- received by the petitioner by way of salary.
The award passed by the Labour Court, Patiala stands modified to this extent.
Partion are left to bear their own costs.