TS Doabia, J - Heard.
This is a petition under the Contempt of Courts Act.
According to the petitioners, the respondents are guilty of having violated an order of injunction passed by VIII Additional District Judge to the Court of District Judge, Gwalior.
The facts which have been narrated in the petition are as under :-  A suit was filed seeking permanent injunction against the defendants mentioned in the plaint.
The defendants are State of Madhya Pradesh through District Magistrate and Nazul Officer, Gwalior.
Municipal Corporation of Gwalior and MP Electricity Board, Gwalior through Executive Engineer are also parties to the litigation referred to above.
The trial court refused to grant an injunction.
This order was passed on 13th, August, 1993.
An appeal was preferred.
In appeal, an order was passed by the VIII A.D.J.
to the court of District Judge, Gwalior.
This order was passed on 24th September, 1993.
A direction was given not to dispossess the petitioners except in due course of law.
According to the petitioners, these respondents arrayed in the present petition have disobeyed the order of induction so passed by the District Court.
I am of the view that it is not a fit case for exercising jurisdiction under Contempt of Courts Act because alternate remedy is available to the petitioners under Order 39 Rule 2-A of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
Essen tially, contempt of Court is a matter which concerns the administration of justice and the dignity and authority of judicial tribunals.
A party can bring to the notice of Court facts constituting what may appear to amount to contempt of Court for such action as the Court deems it expedient to adopt.
But essentially, jurisdiction in contempt is not a right of a party, to be invoked for the redressal of his grievances; nor is it a mode by which the rights of a party, adjudicated upon by a tribunal, can be enforced against another party.
The entire corpus of execution law exists for the enforcement of rights, by one party against another, which have been the subject matter of adjudication.
Where the contempt is serious and there is an apprehension that the Court whose order has been disobeyed may not be able to award adequate sentence or it may otherwise find itself in difficuties in dealing with the case, this Court may take action under the Act notwithstanding the specific provisions of Order 39, Rule 2, Sub-rule (3), Civil P.C.
Such cases must be exceptional and clear.
I do not find any special reason in the case before me, for dealing with the alleged contempt under the Act, here.
In a very similar situation, on the facts, in Bukhtiarpur Bihar Light Rly Co Ltd v. State of Bihar, 1951 Pat 231 a Bench of that Court declined to exercise jurisdiction by the issue of a writ of mandamus under Art. 226, where a flagrant and wilful disobedience of an agreement was alleged.
The Bench pointed out that the alternative legal remedy available to the aggrieved party was no less convenient, beneficial and effectual, the writ power was discretionary in character, and the party must ordinarily report to the Civil Court of competent jurisdiction for necessary reliefs.
Similar view has been expressed in A Ramalingam v. VV Mahalinga Nadar, A.I.R. 1966 Madras 21, and RR Pandey v. RK Bhargava and others, AIR 1971, All 231.
Even otherwise, these are disputed question of facts.
As such, the petitioner may if so advised seek remedies under the aforementioned provisions.
This petition is disposed of accordingly.