T.S.DOABIA, J. - "In view of the increasing complexity of modern life and the interdependence of the various sectors of a planned national economy, it is obviously in the interest of the public that labour disputes should be peacefully and quickly settled within the frame-work of the Act rather than by resort to methods of direct action which are only too well calculated to disturb the public peace and order and diminish production in the country, and courts should not be astute to discover formal defects and technical flaws to overthrow such settlements."
Such was the view expressed by the Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court of India in the case of The State of Madras v. CP Sarathy and another.
AIR 1953 SC 53.
This cardinal principle which was stated in the early years of the RePublic of India has been given a complete go by in the present case.
The Appropriate Government has refused to refer the dispute for adjudication before the appropriate forum.
It has refused to exercise jurisdiction under section 10 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as the `Act').
This is how this petition has come to be filed in this Court.
The brief facts are as under :-  Ramesh Singh Sangar, the writ petitioner is this case, was employed with Central Bank of India.
His service tenure was brought to an end.
He approached the Secretary of Ministry of Labour, Government of India, New Delhi.
He wanted adjudication before the forums constituted under the Act.
His prayer was declined.
Copy of the order so passed is annexure P/4.
The relevant portion reads as under :-  "It is reported that the workman had not completed 240 days of continuous service during the period of 12 calendar months preceding the date of his termination so as to be entitled to the benefits of Sections 25 B and 25 F of the ID Act".
It is the above order which is being impugned in the present petition.
According to the petitioner, the Appropriate Government was not supposed to go into the merits of the controversy.
It was only concerned with the question as to whether an industrial dispute existed or not.
According to him if it did exist then this should have been referred to the Industrial Tribunal or to the Labour Court for its settlement.
2.
The contention of the learned counsel appearing for the respondents is that the decision given by the Appropriate Government is not subject to judicial review.
It is argued that the decision given by this Appropriate Government calls for no interference under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
3.
One thing which is apparent on the record is that the service tenure of the petitioner was brought to an end.
This would on the face of it be an industrial dispute in view of the provisions contained in section 2-A of the Act.
Section 2-A be noticed as under :-  "2-A.
Dismissal, etc. of an individual workman to be deemed to be an industrial dispute.
--Where any employer discharges, dismisses, retrenches or otherwise terminates the services of an individual workman, any dispute or difference between that workman and his employer connected with, or arising out of, such discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or termination shall be deemed to be an industrial dispute notwithstanding that no other workman nor any union of workmen is a party to the dispute."
Thus, prima facie, whenever there is termination of services and it falls within the parameters of section 2-A, then it is to be presumed that an industrial dispute does exist.
The question as to whether such dispute is required to be referred for adjudication or whether the appropriate Government can decline at the very initial stage is a matter which be now examined.
4.
In Bombay Union of Journalists and others v. The State of Bombay and another, AIR 1964 SC 1617, the Supreme Court did observe that the Government was not precluded from making a prima facie examination on the merits of the dispute while considering whether a reference was necessary or not.
The Court observed as under :-  "... ...
But it would not be possible to accept the plea that the appropriate Government is precluded from considering even prima facie the merits of the dispute when it decides the question as to whether its power to make a reference should be exercised under Section 10 (1) read with Section 12 (5) or not.
If the claim made is patently frivolous, or is clearly belated, the appropriate Government may refuse to make a reference.
Likewise, if the impact of the claim on the general relations between the employer and the employees in the region is likely to be adverse, the appropriate Government may take that into account in deciding whether a reference should be made or not."
But above is not the entire statement of law.
In a later portion it was further observed as under :-  "....
Similarly, on disputed questions of fact, the appropriate Government cannot purport to reach final conclusions, for that again would be the province of the Industrial Tribunal..." Thus, the appropriate Government can examine the limited issues which may fall within the parameters indicated in case of Bombay Union of journalists (supra).
However, the proposition is well-settled that the appropriate Government cannot reach final conclusion on merits.
This is because this falls within the domain of the authorities constituted under the Act.
5.
In shambu Nath Goyal v. Bank of Baroda, AIR 1978 SC 1088, this question was considered.
Reference was made to the observations made by Lord Denning in Beetham v. Trinidad Cement Ltd' (1960) 1 ALL.
ER 274, with a view to find out as to what is meant by the term "difference " and "dispute".
The relevant observation from the above case was quoted and it be noticed again as under :-  "by definition a `trade dispute' existes whenever a `difference' exists and a difference can exist long before the parties became locked in a combat.
It is not necessary that they should have come to blows.
It is sufficient that they should be sparring for an opening."
The Supreme Court observed that if the dispute was an industrial dispute, its factual existence and expediency of making a reference in the circumstances of a particular case are matters entirely for the Government to decide upon and it will not be competent for the Court to hold the reference bad and quash the proceedings for want of jurisdiction merely because in its opinion there was no material before the Government on which it could have come to an affirmative conclusion of those matters.
Reference was also made to the decision in Sindhu Resettlement Corporation Ltd v. Industrial Tribunal, AIR 1968 SC 529.
It was ultimately concluded that the question as to whether an industrial dispute exisetd at the date of reference is a question of fact to be determined on the material placed before the Tribunal with the cautions enunciated in CP Sarathy's case (supra)  6.
In Nirmal Singh v. State of Punjab and others, AIR 1984 SC 1619, the appropriate Government declined to refer the dispute on the ground that the delinquent employee was not workman within the meaning of the definition as occurring in Section 2(s).
The Supreme Court came to the conclusion that the question as to whether the person concerned fell within the definition of the `workman' or not was a matter which was supposed to be determined by this authority constituted under the Act and the fact that no reasons were given by the Labour Commissioner who was exercising the powers of the Appropriate Government for declining the reference.
The Supreme Court quashed the order of the Labour Commissioner and gave a direction that reference be made to the Labour Court or to the Industrial Tribunal, as the case may be.
7.
In M.P. Irrigation Karamchari Sangh v. State of M.P. and another, AIR 1985 SC 860, the question was whether employees of Chambal Hydel Irrigation Scheme were entitled to dearness allowance equal to that of Central Government employees and that whether they were entitled to Chambal allowance.
The State Government refused to refer the matter on the ground that it would cause additional burden on the State Exchequer.
This reason was found to be a reason not within the four corners of Sections 10 and 12(5) of the Act.
It was observed that as to what are the conditions of service of an employee is a matter which is the special preserve of the authorities constituted under the Act to be decided in an adjudicatory process and not once to be decied by the Government on a prima facie examination of the demand.
It was further observed that there may be some cases where the demand is frivolous for perverse, but even in these matters a note of caution was given.
It was observed that the Government should be very slow to attempt an examination of the demand with a view to decline reference and the Courts should be vigilant whenever the Government attempts to usurp the powers of the Tribunal for adjudication of valid disputes.
It was observed "to allow the Government to do so would be to render Section 10 and Section 12(5) of the Industrial Disputes Act nugatory.
The same view was expressed in Ram Avtar Sharma and others v. State of Haryana and another, AIR 1985 SC 915.
It was observed that where the Government acted on extraneous and irrelevant grounds, which are not germane to determination of the dispute, then the Government can be called upon to reconsider the matter.
The same view was expressed in a later case reported as Telco Convov Drivers Mazdoor Sangh and another v. State of Bihar and others, AIR 1989 SC 1565, and it was held that while considering question whether reference should be made or not the appropriate Government cannot delve into merits of dispute and determine the lis itself.
8.
The present case is squarely covered by the Supreme Court in Telco Convoy drivers Mazdoor Sangh's case (supra).
The question as to whether the petitioner had not completed 240 days of continuous service was a matter which could be decided only after evidence was led.
The workman could have proved that he had continuously worked more than 240 days.
He could have again pleaded even Sundays and paid holidays should be counted for determining the period of 240 days.
This is because in Workmen of American Express International Banking Corporation v. Management of American Express International Banding Corporation, AIR 1986 SC 458, the Supreme Court of India had observed that for the purpose of counting 240 days a workman is entitled to get paid holidays and Sundays also counted in this period.
The relevant observations made by the Supreme Court are as under :-  "This expression, according to us, cannot mean those days only when the workedman with hammer, sickle or pen, but must necessarily comprehend all those days during which he was in the employment of the employer and for which he had been paid wages either under express or implied contract of service or by compulsion of statute, standing orders, etc.
Therefore, the question whether Sundays and other paid holidays should be taken into account for the purpose of reckoning the total number of days on which the workman could be said to have actually worked was not considered in that case."
9.
Thus, all these questions of facts could have been decided only after evidence is led.
No evidence was available before the Appropriate Government.
It has decided the dispute on merits and this is what precisely it is not supposed to do in view of the decision given by the Supreme Court of India from time to time which decisions have been noticed above.
In this view of the matter, the order annexure P/4 cannot be sustained and is liable to be quashed.
10.
The question as to whether this Court can direct the appropriate Government to refer the matter be also examined.
11. the learned counsel for the petitioner states that a direction be given in this regard straightway.
No doubt such a course was adopted in case of Telco Convoy (supra) and the Appropriate Government was directed to refer the matter to the Tribunal.
Again same course was adopted in earlier cases decided by the supreme Court.
Some of these are as under :-  AIR 1985 SC 915 (supra), AIR 1985 SC 860 (supra), and, AIR 1984 SC 1619 (supra).
12.
But, I am of the view that under Article 226 it is not possible to issue a writ of mandamus asking the appropriate Government to refer the dispute to the Labour Court or to the Industrial Tribunal.
The only direction which can be given is that appropriate Government would reconsider the matter.
It would take notice of the fact that an individual dispute is prima facie an industrial dispute in view of the provisions contained in Section 2-A of the Act.
It would also take notice of the fact that the disputed questions of facts cannot be determined at its own and it would not delve into the merits of the controversy.
Let appropriate decision to refer the dispute be taken within a period of three months.
The period of three months would begin from the date the copy of the order passed by this court along with writ petition and its annexures are made available to the appropriate Government.
The petitioner would also be entitled to costs.
Costs Rs. 250/-.
Petition stands disposed of.