TS Doabia, J - The petitioner is aggrieved against the order passed by the Industrial Court whereby the relief of reinstatement granted by the Labour Court was upheld but variation was made with regard to grant of back-wages.
The Labour Court had granted full back-wages.
The Industrial Court has reduced it to 50%.
It is this change made by the Industrial Court which is being impugned in the present writ petition.
2.
In para 7 of the order passed by the Industrial Court, a finding has been recorded to the effect that seven passengers were permitted to travel by bus without they being in possession of a valid ticket.
The petitioner was the conductor in that bus.
This act on the part of the petitioner in not issuing the tickets was treated as a major misconduct and an enquiry was held.
In the enquiry so held, it was held that the petitioner was guilty.
3.
It may be seen that the Labour Court came to the conclusion that as the petitioner had already been punished by criminal Court, therefore, the imposition of punishment of termination would amount to putting the petitioner to double jeopardy and shall be hit by the principles contained in Article 20 of the Constitution of India.
On this reasoning, the Labour Court quashed the order of termination and reinstated with full backwages.
4.
The Industrial Court, as noted above, has reaffirmed the finding that enquiry was valid, but came to the conclusion that non-grant of 50% wages would be sufficient punishment to the petitioner and this was the reason which prevailed with the Industrial Court in denying the relief.
5.
I am of the view that the order passed by the Industrial Court calls for no interference.
The reliance placed by the learned counsel for the petitioner on Hindustan Tin Works v. Its Employees (AIR 1979 SC 75) and a few decisions of this court would not be attracted.
Those are cases in which the termination was held to be void.
It was because of this that in those cases while granting the relief of reinstatment, full backwages were given.
This is however a case where the petitioner was found to be guilty, and taking a lenient view of the matter, the Industrial Court came to the conclusion that non-grant of 50% wages would serve as sufficient punishment and meet the ends of justice.
No exception can be taken to the reasoning so adopted by the Industrial Court.
6.
It may also be noticed that the reasoning given by the Labour Court that as the petitioner stood convicted by a criminal Court, therefore, any punishment which may be awarded by the disciplinary authority would amount to punishing the petitioner twice for the same event is wrong.
What is prohibited under Article 20 of the Constitution of India is that a person is not to be convicted twice for the same offence.
When disciplinary proceedings are taken, the delinquent is not being punished for the offence.
An order passed by the punishing authority in a disciplinary proceeding is in addition to an order of punishment imposed by the Criminal Court this is permissible under the law.
If any judicial precedent is required to be noticed.
This reference be made to the decision given by the Supreme Court of India in Maqbool Hussain v. State of Bombay (AIR 1953 SC 325).
In para 12, it was observed :  " The words "before a Court of law of judicial tribunal" are not to be found in Art. 20(2).
But if regard be had to the whole background indicated above it is clear that in order that the protection of Art. 20(2) be invoked by a citizen there must have been a prosecution and punishment in respect of the same offence before a Court of law or a tribunal, required by law to decide the matters in controversy judicially on evidence on oath which it must be authorised by law to administer and not before a tribunal which entertains a departmental or an administrative enquiry even though set up by a statute but not required to proceed on legal evidence given on oath.
The very wording of Art. 20 and the words used therein :- "convicted", "commission of the act charged as an offence", "be subjected to a penalty", "commission of the offence", "prosecuted and punished", "accused of any offence", would indicate that the proceedings therein contemplated are of the nature of criminal proceedings before a Court of law or a judicial tribunal and the prosecution in this context would mean an initiation or starting of proceedings of a criminal nature before a Court of law or a judicial tribunal in accordance with the procedure prescribed in the statute which creates the offence and regulates the procedure."
This concept was further elaborated by Supreme Court of India in SA Venkataraman v. Union of India & others (AIR 1954 SC.
375).
It was observed :-  " Although these were the materials which formed the background of the guarantee of the fundamental right given in Article 20(2) of the Constitution, the ambit and contents of the guarantee, as this court pointed out in the case referred to above, are much narrower than those of the Common Law rule in England or the doctrine of "Double Jeopardy" in the American Constitution.
Article 20(2) of our Constitution, it is to be noted, does not contain the principle of "autrefois acquit" at all.
It seems that our Constitution makers did not think it necessary to raise one part of the Common Law rule to the level of a fundamental right and thus make it immune from legislative interference.
This has been left to be regulated by the general law of the land."
In order to enable a citizen to invoke the protection of clause (2) of Article 20 of the Constitution.
There must have been both prosecution and punishment in respect of the same offence.
The words "prosecuted and punished" are to be taken not distributively so as to mean prosecuted `or' punished.
Both the factors must co-exist in order that the operation of the clause may be attracted.
The position is also different under the American Constitution.
There the prohibition is not against a second punishment but against the peril in which a person may be placed by reason of a valid indictment being presented against him, before a competent court, followed by proper arraignment and plea and a lawful impanelling of the jury.
It is not necessary to have a verdict at all.
Vide Willis on Constitutional Law, p.528.
It was further observed :-  " It may be pointed out that the words "prosecution" and "punishment" have no fixed connotation and they are susceptible of both a wider and a narrower meaning, but in Article 20(2) both these words have been used with reference to an "offence" and the word "offence" has to be taken in the sense in which it is used in General Clauses Act as meaning "an act or omission made punishable by any law for the time being in force."
It follows that the prosecution must be in reference to the law which creates the offence and the punishment must also be in accordance with what that law prescribes."
Ultimately it was concluded :-  "In an enquiry under the Public Servants (Inquiries) Act of 1850, there is neither any question of investigating an offence in the sense of an act or omission punishable by any law for the time being in force.
Nor is there any question of imposing punishment prescribed by the law which makes that act or omission an offence."
7.
Thus there is no merit in the argument that departmental proceedings cannot be taken merely because the petitioner was earlier punished in a criminal case.
8.
This petition is without merit and is dismissed with no order as to costs.