Asok Kumar Chakravarty, J - The petitioner has filed the writ petition for getting the monthly family pension benefit from the respondent authorities.
2.
The facts of the case are as follows :-  The petitioner's husband Gandem Raja Rao died on April 23, 1985 while he was in regular service under Bangalakshmi Cotton Mills, Srerampore, Hooghly.
Since 1965 Gandem Raja Rao had been in the regular service as a teacher under the said Cotton Mill holding a permanent employees membership being employees Provident Fund A/C No. WB/112/3103.
Gandem Raja Rao fell ill and remained under medical treatment from April, 1983 to December, 1984.
He resumed his duties from January, 1985 and worked till his death in April, 1985.
The petitioner's husband Gandem Raja Rao was a member of the employees provident fund while he was in service as aforesaid.
He opted to exercise his option for becoming a member of the said fund and was covered by the employees family pension scheme.
Upon the death of Gandem Raja Rao the petitioner under paragraphs 29 and 30 of the Employees Family Pension Scheme (in short, The Scheme) applied for monthly family pension benefit.
On 20188 Assistant Accounts Officer of the office of the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner, West Bengal, informed the petitioner by a letter that Gandem Raja Rao did not contribute towards family pension fund from April, 1983 to December, 1984 and that his membership had ceased after 12 months from April 1, 1988 due to such non-contribution.
She was further informed in the said letter that Gandem Raja Rao after joining his duties merely contributed for three months, that is from January, 1985 to March, 1985 and thus became a member of the said fund for three months only.
The petitioner got another letter dated 161289 from the respondent authorities that she is not entitled to have monthly pension benefit as Gandem Raja Rao had a continuous break in the reckonable service for more than one year from April, 1983 to December, 1984, prior to his death on April 24, 1985.
The petitioner has alleged that she has been deprived of the monthly family pension benefit illegally, unjustly and arbitrarily.
She accordingly filed the writ application for the following reliefs :-  (a) a writ or direction and/or order in the nature of mandamus commanding the respondents to grant monthly family pension benefit to the petitioner and her minor children.
(b) a writ or direction and/or order in nature of mandamus commanding the respondents not to withhold the monthly family pension benefit to the petitioner and her minor children.
(c) a writ or direction and/or order in the nature of certiorari commanding the respondents to certify and transmit to this Hon'ble Court the entire records of the case relating to the withholding or non-granting of the said monthly family pension benefit, so that conscionable justice may be done by quashing all steps, directions, orders taken or issued in not granting or in withholding the said benefit; 3.
In the affidavit-in-opposition by the respondents authorities it was alleged that M/s. Bangalakshmi Cotton Mill of Mahesh, Srerampur, Hooghly was covered under the provisions of the Employees' Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952.
Gandem Raja Rao was a member of the fund and his A/c No. was WB/112/3103.
Sri Rao executed a valid nomination in favour of his wife.
Sri Rao was working in the said establishment on no work no pay basis.
During the period from the month of April, 1982 to the month of December, 1982 and from the month of April, 1983 to December, 1984, the said Sri Rao was on leave without pay.
No provident fund deduction was made from the wages of the said Sri Rao during the aforesaid period and no contributions were also deposited in his account during the aforesaid period.
Since Sri Rao did not draw any wages during the said period no contributions were deposited to his credit in regard to the Employees' Family Pension Scheme, 1971.
The period during which family pension contributions were not deposited continuously was of nine months.
According to the provisions of Family Pension Scheme, 1971, the widow of a member of the family pension fund is entitled to family pension only when such a member died during the period of reckonable service before attaining the age of 60 years and further subject to the condition that such a member has contributed to the family pension fund for a period of not less than one year.
The petitioner thus having not drawn wages for more than one year or more his widow shall not be entitled to family pension.
It was denied that the petitioner was deprived of the benefit of the family pension scheme without any reason.
It was accordingly alleged that the petition is liable to be rejected.
In her affidavit-in-reply it was alleged that Gandem Raja Rao had the requisite reckonable service in terms of the sub-clause (f) of Clause 2 of the Employees' Family Pension Scheme, 1971 read with provisions of Clause 6 thereof.
4.
Mr. Ranabir Mahapatra, learned Advocate appearing for the petitioner, had two fold submissions to make in this matter.
His first contention was that by amendment which came into effect from 1488 the proviso of Para 2(f) that the entitlement to the Employees' Family Pension Scheme, 1971 shall depend on rendering of reckonable service for more than one year having been deleted the petitioner cannot be deprived of the monthly family pension on that ground.
His second contention was that the Employees' Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 and the scheme being social benefit oriented legislation that interpretation should be made in favour of the weaker sections and also that the subsequent amendment by which the mandate of putting in one year of reckonable service having been omitted from a specific date it shall discriminate between two groups of employees without reasonable basis for such discrimination.
5.
Mr. Jayanta Chowdhury, learned Counsel appearing for the respondent authorities submitted that the point for consideration being whether the petitioner shall be entitled to family pension her claim to the same is to be considered in terms of the law prevalent at the time of death of Gandem Raja Rao.
If she had no claim at that point of time any subsequent amendment of the law in that matter shall not vest her with any right to claim the same.
It was further submitted that the amendment shall be deemed always to have prospective operation and unless any provisions of law is given retrospective effect, no amount of interpretation can give operation to any provisions of law or amendment.
6.
There is no dispute in respect of the position of law that in order to be entitled to the family pension scheme following conditions require to be satisfied : (1) the member must continue to be a member of the family pension fund on the date of his death (2) the member must be within a period of reckonable service at the time of his death (3) the reckonable service as defined in paragraph 2F of the scheme includes any period of service in respect of which no wages are drawn by such member (4) but if the period in respect of which no wages have been drawn by member is in excess of one year than such period shall not be treated as reckonable service.
The provisions of paragraph 6 of the scheme further clarified the position.
It will appear from the said paragraph that a member of family pension fund shall continue to be a member of the said fund if he died during the period of reckonable service which does not exceed one year.
Thus if the member of a family pension fund does not earn any wages for a period exceeding one year, a break takes place in his membership and such a member ceases to be a member of the fund.
In such circumstances the member has to qualify afresh for the purpose of treating him within the period of reckonable service, by contributing to the family pension fund at least for a fresh period of one year.
In the instant case Gandem Raja Rao having been without pay from the month of April, 1983 to December, 1984 lost his membership to the fund by not drawing any wages for more than one year.
He resumed his duties on 1st January, 1985, but unfortunately died in the month of April of the same year.
Therefore he could not complete one year of reckonable service.
The conclusion accordingly is inescapable that at the time of when Gandem Raja Rao died he was not a member of the fund.
7.
Mr. Mahapatra, learned Advocate appearing for the petitioner drew my attention that the proviso II of Section 2F of the Scheme of 1971, as it originally was and pointed out that the requirement of one year of wage earning service for the purpose of calculating reckonable service has undergone a change by the amendment of the said proviso by G.S.R.
500 dated 3688 which came into effect from 1488 by which this provision was deleted.
Though this point was not specifically taken in the petition he had two fold submissions to make on this amendment.
In the first place, he contended, that the Employees' Provident Fund Act under which the scheme was drawn being a social benefit oriented legislation that such amendment shall be deemed to have a retrospective operation.
The second limb of his argument in this matter is that there being no rational nexus for the position necessitating a change in the position of existing law as it was before the Amendment Act, 1988 that it must be deemed that the legislature intended that the proviso II of para 2F shall never be in operation.
Attention of this Court was drawn by him to the case of B Prabhakar Rao v. State of AP, reported in AIR 1986 SC 210.
He specifically referred to paragraph 22 of the decision where it is stated :- ``While it is general rule of law that statutes are not to operate retrospectively, they may so operate by express enactment, by necessary implication from the language implied or where the statute is explanatory or declaratory or where the statute is passed for the purpose of protecting the public against some evil or abuse or where the statute engrafts itself upon existing situation etc. etc.
But it would be incorrect to call a statute `retrospective' ``because a part of the requisites for its action is drawn from a time anticident to its passing'' ... we must further remember, quite apart from any question of retrospectivity, that, unlike in the United Kingdom here in India we have a written Constitution which confers justiciable fundamental rights and so the very refusal to make an Act retrospective or the non-application of the Act with reference to a date or to an event that took place before the enactment may, by itself, create an impermissible classification justifying the striking down of the non-retrospectivity of non-application clause, as offending the fundamental right to equality before the law and equal protection of the laws.
It is necessary to understand the facts of this case which necessitate the Supreme Court to pass this judgment.
In this case the age of superannuation of the State Government employees was reduced from 58 years to 55 years abruptly.
The Government having subsequently realised that serious wrong and grave injustice had been caused to its employees by this decision and accordingly by the subsequent Amendment Act, the said age of superannuation at 58 years was restored.
The Amendment Act, however, was not given any retrospective effect.
In this background the Supreme Court held that Amendment Act should be deemed to have retrospective operation for the reasons mentioned above.
In para 32 of the said judgment this point was made clear.
It was stated there ``we are not to be understood as laying down that whenever the age of superannuation of the Government employees or of local authorities etc. is enhanced the benefit of such enhancement should be extended not merely to persons in service on the date on which the change is effected but also persons who have already retired from service prior to that date.
It is not well established by decisions of this Court that the Government has full power to effect change in the age of superannuation of its employees on relevant considerations.
If in the exercise of such power the age of superannuation is enhanced purely by way of implementation of a policy decision taken by the Government, such alteration can legally be brought about with prospective effect from the date of the commencement of the operation of the Ordinance Act or Rule and no question of violation of Act 14 or 16 of the Constitution will arise merely because the benefit of the change is not extended to employees who have already retired from service.
In these cases now before us our conclusion is rested entirely on the finding arrived at by us after a consideration of the factual background and legislative history of the impugned Ordinance and Act that the underlying purpose and object behind the relevant provisions of the Ordinance and the Act was to set right and nullify a wrong or injustice that had been done to the employees by the abrupt reduction of the age of superannuation from 58 years to 55 years.''
In view of the peculiar circumstances in which the aforesaid decision was made and in view of the rule of law has laid down by the Supreme Court as stated above.
Attention of this Court was also drawn to the decision on Bharat Singh v. Management of New Delhi Tuberculosis Centre reported in AIR 1986 SC 842 where in interpreting Section 17B of the Industrial Disputes Act (14 of 1947) it was held that ``in interpretation of statutes, Courts have steered clear of the rigid stand of looking into the words of the section alone but have attempted to make the object of the enactment effective and to render its benefit into the person in whose favour it is made.
The legislators are entrusted with the task of only making laws.
Interpretation has to come from the Courts.
Section 17-B on its terms does not say that it would bind awards passed before the date when it came into force.
The respondents' contention is that a section which imposes any obligation for the first time cannot be made retrospective.
Such section should always be considered prospective.
In our view, if the submission is accepted, we will be defeating the very purpose for which this section has been enacted.
It is here that the Court has to evolve the concept of purposive interpretation which has found acceptance whenever a progressive social beneficial legislation is under review.
We share the view that where the words of a statute are plain and unambiguous effect must be given to them.
Plain words have to be accepted as such but where the intention of the legislature is not clear from the words or where two constructions are possible, it is the Court's duty to discern the intention in the context of the background in which a particular section is enacted.
Once such an intention is ascertained the Courts have necessarily to give the statute a purposeful or a functional interpretation.
Now, it is trite to say that Acts aimed at social amelioration giving benefits for the have-nots should receive liberal construction.
It is always the duty of the Court to give such a construction to a statute as would promote the purpose of object of the Act.
A construction that promotes the purpose of the legislation should be preferred to a literal construction.
A construction which would defeat the rights of the have-nots and the underdog and which would lead to injustice should always be avoided.
This section was intended to benefit the workmen in certain cases.
It would be doing injustice to the section if we were to say that it would not apply to awards passed a day or two before it came into force.''
This case also is distinguishable from the facts of the present case.
In the penultimate part of this judgment it was held that ``the conferment of a new jurisdiction can effect only prospectively except when a contrary intention appears on the fact of the statute.
Section 11-A plainly indicates its prospective operation.
This is made clear in the proviso to the section when it says ``provided that in any proceeding under this section''.
This can only mean something relatable to a stage after the section came into being.
That is not the case with Section 17-B Here it is not the conferment of a new jurisdiction but the codification in statutory form of a right available to the workmen to get back wages when certain given conditions are satisfied.
There are no words in the section to compel the Court to hold that it cannot operate retrospectively.
Before Section 17-B was introduced there was no bar for Courts for awarding wages.
Of course the workmen had no right to claim it.
This section recognizes such a right.
To construe it in a manner detrimental to workmen would be to defeat its object.''
8.
I have mentioned the relevant portions of the two above cases referred to by Mr. Mahapatra in extenso for the purpose of showing the context under which these decisions were made.
These decisions do not lay down any hard and fast rule that any section or enactment or amending provision shall invariably be given retrospective effect but these merely say that in certain circumstances to combat the greater evil of perpetuating social injustice that the Court should give a liberal construction in matters where words of the enactment do not plainly show that they were given a retrospective effect.
In the instant case the position was entirely different.
At the time when Gandem Raja Rao does or at the time when the cause of action for his widow, the petitioner, to lay her claim arose for the Family Pension Fund the existing law as prevailing at that time made one years of wage-earning service as sine-qua-non for computation of reckonable service.
That criterian having not been fulfilled in the instant case the petitioner cannot have any claim in respect of the said fund.
9.
In this context the second limb of the argument of Mr. Mahapatra that since the proposed amendment creates two clauses of beneficiaries under the scheme one before and the other after the amendment without any reasonable basis for such classification that the amendment should be deemed to have retrospective effect may be considered.
Reference in this connection made to the decision of the Constitution Bench in D S Nakara v. Union of India, reported in AIR 1983 SC 130, where it was observed that ``in order, however, to pass the test of permissible classification, two conditions must be fulfilled, namely, (I) that the classification must be founded on an intelligible differentia which distinguished persons of things that are grouped together from those that are left out of the group and (II) that differentia must have reference to the object sought to be achieved by this statute in question........'' In another part of the said judgment it was said that ``the state, therefore, is under the obligation to satisfy the Court that the twin tests have been satisfied.
It can only be satisfied if the state establishes not only the rational principle on which classification is founded but also that it co-relates to the object sought to be achieved.
10.
It is obvious that the definition of reckonable service in paragraph 2F of the Scheme was made less stringent in the light of the experience of the hardship experienced by the family members of the fund and for (sic) amendment was effected in 1988.
The legislature in the light of its experience can make the law liberal or stringent suiting the needs of the society but that cannot be any ground for any person claiming that he shall be governed by any law existing previously or subsequently according to his choice.
Contemporaneous law or the law existing at the relevant time shall be applicable for determining the rights or liabilities of any person when the cause of action arose.
In the case of Martin Burn Limited v. The Corporation of Calcutta, reported in AIR 1966 SC 529, it was held that ``result flowing for a statutory provision is never an evil and a Court has no power to ignore that provision to give relief what it considers distress resulting from its operation.
A statute must of course be given effect whether Court likes result or not.
11.
It is therefore clear that the continuation on behalf of the petitioner's that her husband's service should be treated as reckonable service under Para 2F of the Scheme in view of the subsequent amendment of 1988 of the proviso II of paragraph 2F of the Scheme cannot be acceptable in view of the facts and circumstances of the case as discussed above.
In this connection reference may also be made to the case of Hitendra Bishnu Thakur v. State of Maharashtra, reported in 1994(3) RCR(Crl.)
156 (SC) : (1994) 4 SCC 602 : (AIR 1994 SC 2623), wherein dealing with the ambit and scope of Amending Act and its retrospective operation it was held that ``from the law settled by the Court in various cases the illustrative though not exhaustive principles which emerge with regard to the ambit and scope of Amending Act and retrospective operation may be culled out as follows :-  (i) A statute which effects substantive rights is presumed to be prospective in operation unless made retrospective, either expressly or by necessary intendment, whereas a statute which merely affects procedure, unless such a construction is textually impossible, is presumed to be retrospective in its application, should not be given an extended meaning and should be strictly confined to its clearly defined limits.
(ii) Law relating to forum and limitation is procedural in nature, whereas law relating to right of action and right of appeal even though remedial is substantive in nature.
(iii) Every litigant has a vested right in substantive law but no such right exists in procedural law.
(iv) A procedural statute should not generally speaking be applied retrospectively where the result would be to create new disabilities or obligation or to impose new duties in respect of transactions already accomplished.
(v) Statute which not only changes the procedure but also creates new rights and liabilities shall be construed to be prospective in operation, unless otherwise provided, either expressly or by necessary implication.''
12.
The Amending Act, 1988 by deleting the requirement of one year of wage earning service as an ingredient for computation of reckonable service being directed to affect substantive rights of person entitled to Family Pension Fund cannot have any retrospective operation in view of the position of law laid down by the Supreme Court stated above.
13.
So upon careful consideration of the facts and circumstances along with the position of law applicable in this case I am to hold the petitioner shall not be entitled to relief as prayed for in this writ petition.
14.
The writ petition accordingly fails.
15.
There would be no order as to costs.
16.
As prayed for, let Zerox copies of the order be made available to the learned Advocates for the parties on usual undertakings.
Petition dismissed.