GS Singhvi, J - Both these petitions, i.e. CWP No.1503 of 1995 (Kuljit Kaur v. State of Punjab and others), 1995(3) SCT 289 (P&H).
and CWP No.3029 of 1995 (Ms. Rashwinder Kaur v. State of Punjab and others) involve an almost identical claim made by the petitioners namely, admission to the Elementary Teachers Training Course and, therefore, decision of both these petitions by a common order is just and proper.
2.
The petitioner Kuljit Kaur (in CWP No1503/95) is a member of Scheduled Caste.
She had applied for admission to the Elementary Teachers Training Course in response to an advertisement dated 481994 issued by the respondents.
She appeared in the entrance test held by the respondents on 1891994.
Result of this examination was declared on 1511995.
Name of the petitioner does not figure amongst the successful candidates.
The petitioner says that her academic record is brilliant and she was very hopeful of being selected.
However, due to an apparent error in the examination of the answer-sheets, she has not been included in the list of successful candidates.
In para-8 of the writ petition, the petitioner has alleged that there seems to be a mistake in the key-code as a result of which proper marks have not been given to the candidates and this has resulted in an improper evaluation of her answer-sheets.
Another grievance made by the petitioner is that the respondents have not properly declared the result of the candidates inasmuch as neither the names of the successful nor of unsuccessful candidates have been given nor individual marks for the candidates have been indicated.
The unsuccessful candidates have not even been communicated with their marks and in this manner, the candidates have been deprived of an opportunity to know their performance at the test.
3.
In their reply, the respondents have pleaded that minimum qualifying marks for admission to Elementary Teachers Training Course have been fixed at 45% for SC/S.T.
candidates but the petitioner failed to secure these marks and, therefore, she is not entitled to be admitted.
Respondents have stated that the last candidate admitted under the SC category has secured 11100 marks as against 8950 marks secured by the petitioner out of the total of 200 marks.
Further case of the respondents is that the last candidate who has been placed in the waiting list has also secured 1095 marks.
On the basis of these averments, respondents have pleaded that the petitioner is not entitled to any relief.
4.
The petitioner Rashwinder Kaur (in CWP No. 302995) has also appeared at the entrance test held for selection of candidates for admission to the Elementary Teachers Training Course for the session 1994-96.
In all, 700 seats were notified by the respondents.
This petitioner has questioned the validity of the test on the ground that 730 candidates have been given admission as against 700 advertised seats and that the selection of excess candidates is unconstitutional.
Another ground of challenge is that the selection has been made district-wise without regard to the relative merit of the candidates and this has resulted in serious discrimination.
Lastly, it has been pleaded that the impugned selection is contrary to the principles of natural justice.
5.
In their reply, the respondents have pleaded that for general category candidates, minimum pass marks were fixed as 50% and as the petitioner has secured only 472% marks, she cannot be admitted to the course.
Respondents have also stated that JBT/ETT is a district cadre and not a State cadre and the results of the examinations were announced only after vacation of the stay order which was granted earlier in CWP No16297 of 1994.
6.
The principal argument of Mr. Atma Ram is that the respondents have not made a proper evaluation of the answer-sheet of the candidates and, therefore, a direction should be issued to the respondents to produce the key-code as well as the answer-sheets of the petitioner with a further direction to the respondents to reassess the answers of the petitioner.
Mr. Atma Ram argued that the respondents have not denied the allegations contained in para-8 of the writ petition and, therefore, it should be held that the key-code prepared by the respondents was faulty resulting in improper assessment of the answer- sheets of the candidates.
Mr. Atma Ram argued that but for the lack of proper evaluation of the petitioner's performance, she would have been amongst the successful candidates.
Another argument advanced by Mr. Atma Ram is that as and when selection is made by any public authority for admission to a course or for appointment to public service, result of the examination should be duly notified and the marks of successful as well as unsuccessful candidates should be made public.
In support of this argument, Mr. Atma Ram placed reliance on the observations made by this court on 21.9.1994 in CWP No. 12241 of 1994 (Pinki and others v. Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra and others) 1995(1) SCT 313 (P&H).
7.
Mr. Chatrath argued that the respondents have acted illegally in admitting more candidates than the number of seats notified in the advertisement.
According to the learned counsel, there is no indication in the advertisement that the respondents would select more candidates than the advertised seats.
Second argument of Mr. Chatrath is that the district-wise selection made by the respondents is contrary to the object of selecting candidates on the basis of merit.
He relied on the decision of the Supreme Court in P Rajendran v. State of Madras, AIR 1968 SC 1012.
8.
We have given our thoughtful consideration to the submissions advanced by the learned counsel for the petitioners and are of the view that none of them merits acceptance.
Mr. Atma Ram's contention that the key-code prepared for assessment of the performance of the candidate was defective and, therefore, the petitioner's answer sheets have not been properly evaluated resulting in lowering of her percentage, cannot be accepted for the simple reason that the petitoner has not placed any material before this court to prove that the key-code contained mistakes which adversely affected the result of the candidates.
The allegations contained in para-8 do not contain the assertion of the petitioner but indicates the belief of the petitioner that there is a mistake in the kay-code.
Failure of respondents to give a specific answer to such a vague plea cannot lead to a conclusion that the averments made in the writ petition are correct.
We are further of the opinion that what the learned counsel wants us is to direct a re-evaluation of the answer sheets of the petitioner and other candidates.
Re-evaluation of the answer sheets of a candidate can be ordered when there exists a provision in the scheme of examination for re-evaluation of the answer-sheets.
Some schemes of examination contain a provision for re-checking/re-totalling.
In some other examinations, there is a provision for re-evaluation and in some examinations, there is no provison either for re-checking or re-evaluation.
In the absence of any provision in the scheme of examination, the Court cannot issue a writ directing the examining authority to re-evaluate the answer sheet of a particular candidate or more than one candidate.
This principle of law is borne out from the decision of the Supreme Court in Maharashtra State Board of Secondary and Higher Secondary Education v. Paritosh Bhupesh Kumarsheth etc., AIR 1984 SC 1543.
9.
The argument of Mr. Chatrath about the alleged violation of principles of natural justice is wholly without substance.
Learned Counsel has not been able to show as to how the conduct of examination or declaration of result can be treated as a quasi-judicial function so as to attract the applicability of the principles of natural justice.
Even otherwise, interference by the Court in such like matters should be very rare and unless a strong case is made out indicating patent arbitrariness or mala fides, it is not proper for the Court to draw dubuious inferences on the basis of vague assertions.
Mr. Chatrath's contention that the selection of excess number of candidates should be nullified by the Court deserves to be rejected on the short ground that none of those candidates has been made a party to the writ petition qua whom the petitioner has alleged favouritism.
Even if we were to assume that the respondents could not admit excess number of candidates, no direction can be given to undo excess admissions without hearing the affected candidates and as they are not parties to the writ petition, the Court cannot afford an opportunity of hearing to them.
10.
Challenge to the district-wise preparation of merit list must fail on the short ground that the petitoner has not placed any material before the Court to show that the district-wise selection of the candidates is arbitrary or irrational.
In the writ petition, the petitioner has simply stated that the respondents have declared the result of the candidates as per district basis, which against the law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in P Rajendran v. State of Madras, AIR 1968 SC 1012.
However the petitioner has not even referred to the scheme of examination nor is there any reference to the provisons regarding the district-wise merit list.
That apart, there is a controversy between the parties about the nature of cadre of JBT Teachers.
Whereas learned counsel for the petitioners have asserted that it is a State-wise cadre, the respondents have come forward with a specific statement in para-7 of the reply that it is a dictrict cadre.
In our view, the petitioner has failed to place sufficient material before the Court in support of its plea of discrimination and arbitrariness.
The burden to prima facie establish the charge of arbitrariness or discrimination is always on the party which alleges discrimination and unless this burden is discharged, the action taken by a public authority cannot be declared as unconstitutional.
Here the petitioner has completely failed to discharge this primary burden.
Therefore, it is not possible to hold that the declaration of the result suffers from violation of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
11.
Before concluding, we would like to mention that both the petitioners have failed to secure minimum marks on the basis of which their names could be included in the list of successful candidates.
Having failed to secure the minimum marks, the petitioners cannot challenge admission of other candidates.
12.
In the result, the writ petitions fail and the same are dismissed.
However, we would like to reiterate what has been observed by the D.B.
in C.W.P.
No. 12241 of 1994 (Pinki and others v. Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra and others, 1995(1) SC 313 (P&H) (DB) namely that complete result of the examination should not only be published in the Press but as far as possible, it should be conveyed to every candidate.
We would like to emphasise that in our constitutional scheme, there is nothing like secrecy in the result of examinations.
Once the competent authority decides to declare the result of the examination held for selection of candidates for admission to educational institution or for appointment to a public service, it is absolutely necessary that the result is announced in such a manner that the successful as well as unsuccessful candidates know as to how they have performed and how they have been assessed.
Communication of marks to an unsuccessful candidate is more imperative so that he comes to know about his real performance and prepare himself for better performance in future.