NK Sodhi, J - Petitioner was appointed as Clerk-cum-typist with the Punjab Agro Industries Corporation Limited, Chandigarh.
(for short, the management) on August 27, 1985.
Her services were terminated by the management on December 25, 1987 which gave rise to an industrial dispute and the same was referred for adjudication to the Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Chandigarh.
The Labour Court as per its award dated 521990 (published on 23.4.1990 and Annexure P-1 with the writ petition) held that the termination of service of the workman was illegal and that she was entitled to reinstatement with continuity of service and full back wages.
The management was directed to comply with the award within two months from the date of its publication by the Chandigarh Administration.
While the proceedings were pending before the Labour Court, the petitioner joined the Education Department of the Punjab Government as Social Studies Mistress on 1.1.1990.
After the publication of the award, she served a notice on the management requiring it to pay her the back wages in terms of the aforesaid award of the Labour Court for the period from 25121987 to 31121989.
The management having declined to give her the back wages, she filed an application before the Labour Court under Sub-Section (2) of Section 33-C of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter called the Act).
She claimed a sum of Rs62235/- as back wages for a period of two years till 31121989 i.e. till the date she joined that Punjab Education Department.
The Labour Court held that the petitioner was not entitled to back wages as she failed to bring to the notice of that Court the fact of her employment in the Education Department of the State Government.
According to the Labour Court, this was a deliberate concealment of a material fact by the workman and, therefore, her claim was rejected.
It is this order or the Labour Court that has been impugned in the present petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution  2.
The argument of Mr. Arora appearing on behalf of the petitioner is that she is entitled to back wages in terms of the aforesaid award of the Labour Court and that she is claiming wages only upto the period 31121989 whereafter she joined the Punjab Government as Social Studies Mistress.
According to the learned counsel, the right to claim back wages cannot be defeated merely because she has joined the Education Department of the State Government.
On the other hand, the contention of Mr. MS Rahi, Advocate appearing for respondent No.2 is that there was one integrated award directing reinstatement of the petitioner and also payment of back wages to her.
According to the learned counsel, the right to claim back wages is not an independent one and unless she joins the service as directed by the Labour Court, she cannot claim implementation of the award in part.
It is further contended by Mr. Rahi that the petitioner withheld a material fact of her employment from the Court and if the same had been brought to its notice the relief that might have been given to her would have been different because she got employed during the pendency of the proceedings before the Labour Court.
3.
I have heard counsel for the parties at length.
Learned Labour Court while adjudicating the industrial dispute referred to it under section 10(1) of the Act found that the termination was illegal.
The general rule is that in cases where termination is illegal, the workman is normally entitled to reinstatement with full back wages.
This relief was given to the workman in the instant case.
But, if the Labour Court had been informed that the workman had got an employment with the State Government, the nature of relief would have been different.
In such cases, reinstatement obviously is not the relief that can be granted and the Industrial Courts normally award compensation to the workman in lieu of reinstatement.
There is no gainsaying the fact that the petitioner was employed during the pendency of the reference proceeding before the Labour Court.
The relief that is granted to the workman is always a matter of discretion with the Labour Courts/Industrial Tribunals and that discretion has to be exercised keeping in view the facts and circumstances of each case.
Taking note of the fact that the petitioner had been re-employed during the pendency of the proceedings, the award dated 521990 is modified to the extent that the petitioner will be entitled to a sum of Rs. 25,000/- as compensation in lieu of reinstatement.
Obviously, the question of payment of any back wages does not arise.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed and the aforesaid award of the Labour Court modified as indicated above.
The management is directed to pay a sum of Rs25,000/- to the workman within one month from the date of receipt of a copy of this order failing which the amount will carry interest at the rate of 12% per annum.
There is no order as to costs.