GS Singhvi, J (Oral).
- The only substantial issue raised in this petition is that whether the inquiry initiated against the petitioner vide memorandum dated 14101981 (Annexure P-1) shall be allowed to continue after a lapse of more than one decade as on the date of filing of the petitioner and over 13 years as on date or the court should quash the inquiry and thereby put an end to the agony being suffered by the petitioner due to pendency of the inquiry.
2.
It is an admitted position between the parties that the petitioner joined service in the year 1961.
He was posted as Sub Divisional Agriculture Officer, Narwana, in the year 1976.
A complaint was made against the petitioner by the President, Sadachar Samiti, Narwana, to the effect that the petitioner had submitted false Travelling Allowance Bills.
Shri Manmohan Singh, Joint Director, Quality Control, Directorate of Agriculture, Haryana, conducted the preliminary inquiry and submitted his report dated 2841978.
The petitioner was not associated with the preliminary inquiry.
However, on the basis of preliminary inquiry report, memorandum dated 14101981 (Annexure P-1) was issued by the Government for an inquiry against the petitioner under Rule 7 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1952, which had been adopted by the Government of Haryana for its services.
These Rules remained operative qua the employees of the Government of Haryana till the Governor of Haryana framed the Rules known as Haryana Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1987.
3.
The petitioner submitted his reply in the year 1982.
Then there was a silence for a period of over two years.
On 12101984.
The Governor of Haryana appointed the District Attorney (Vigilance Department) as Inquiry Officer to conduct inquiry into the allegations levelled against the petitioner.
Again there was a silence for a period of more than five years and six months.
After that period, the petitioner received notice (Annexure P-5) dated 2551990 from the Inquiry Officer and he was called upon to appear before the Inquiry Officer for further proceedings in the inquiry.
4.
The petitioner has questioned the very initiation of the inquiry vide memorandum dated 14101981 (Annexure P-1) and continuance thereof even after the expiry of more than one decade.
He has pleaded that the inquiry relates to the allegation pertaining to the year 1976-77 and after a lapse of such a long time, there is no justification for continuing the inquiry.
It has also been stated by the petitioner that on account of pendency of the inquiry, he was denied promotion notwithstanding the order dated 9121982 passed by this Court in Civil Writ Petition No391 of 1975, which the petitioner had filed for quashing of his reversion and for his promotion to the Haryana Agriculture Service Grade-I  5.
Notice of motion was issued by a Division Bench on 29101991.
Respondent filed its reply on 18121991.
On 1011992, the Court directed the respondent to file an affidavit to explain as to why the Inquiry proceedings pending against the petitioner had not concluded.
In response to this direction, affidavit of Shri MP Jain, Joint Secretary, Agriculture Department, was filed on 2411992.
After considering the averments made in the writ petition, the reply as well as the additional affidavit of Shri MP Jain, the Court admitted this petition on 3111992 and stayed further proceedings in the inquiry.
6.
The argument advanced by the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the very initiation of the inquiry after a lapse of more than four years calculated from the year of incident deserves to be declared as illegal because the petitioner has been put to serious prejudice on account of undue delay in the initiation of the proceedings.
Learned Counsel further argued that even if initiation of the inquiry is held to be legal, respondent- Government should not be allowed to proceed with the inquiry after a lapse of 18 years calculated with reference to the year of incident and a period of over 13 years (-sic-) charge-sheet.
Learned counsel argued that total failure of the respondent-Government to take any effective step in the conduct of inquiry for a period of more than 5 years of the appointment of the Inquiry Officer is by itself sufficient to draw an inference that in fact there is no substance in the allegations levelled against the petitioner.
Learned Assistant Advocate General countered these submissions and argued that the petitioner has been charge-sheeted in respect of a serious delinquency, namely, submission of false TA bills and, therefore, the proceedings of the inquiry should not be quashed only on the ground of delay.
Learned Counsel argued that the record relating to the charges levelled against the petitioner was misplaced by some official of the Department and, therefore, some delay in the progress of the inquiry has been caused but such delay is not fatal to the initiation of inquiry against the petitioner and continuance thereof.
7.
After having given my thoughtful consideration to the rival contentions, I find sufficient justification to restrain the respondent-Government from proceeding with the inquiry initiated against the petitioner vide Annexure P- 1.
From the admitted facts which have been brought on record, it is clear that the preliminary inquiry report was submitted by Shri Manmohan Singh as early as on 2841978.
It took more than 3 years and almost 6 months to the Government to serve a charge-sheet on the petitioner.
With reference to the year of incident, the charge-sheet was served on the petitioner after a delay of more than 4 years.
No explanation has been furnished by the respondent as to why the Government could not take a decision on the preliminary inquiry report for a long period of three years.
Similarly, there is no explanation for the delay of more than 2 years in the appointment of Inquiry Officer.
Neither in the reply dated 18121991 nor in the affidavit dated 2411992 of Shri MP Jain, a word has been said by the respondent to explain the abnormal delay of 2 years in the appointment of the Inquiry Officer.
Above all, no tangible explanation has been offered for the failure of the respondent- Government and the Inquiry Officer to proceed with the inquiry for 5 years and 6 months after the appointment of the Inquiry Officer.
The only explanation offered for this delay is to be found in the affidavit of Shri MP Jain.
Shri Jain has stated that the Inquiry Officer had written memorandum dated 15111984 to the Financial Commissioner and Secretary to Government, Agriculture Department, with a copy to the Director, Agriculture, to supply all the relevant documents within two weeks and to depute an official of the department to assist him in the conduct of inquiry.
The Financial Commissioner and Secretary to Government, wrote to the Director, Agriculture, on 4.12.1984, who, in turn, wrote to the Deputy Director of Agriculture at Jind on 2051985 to supply the relevant record.
There was a long series of correspondence exchanged between the Financial Commissioner and Secretary to the Government, the Director of Agriculture, the Deputy Director of Agriculture at Jind and the District Attorney (Vigilance Department).
For a period of more than five years, these authorities continued to exchange letters and Demi-Official letters to trace out the record on the basis of which charges were framed against the petitioner.
The record was made available to the Inquiry Officer sometime in the year 1990.
Thus, it can be said that the Government took almost 9 years to create a situation for further proceedings in the inquiry.
Mere exchange of correspondence between the departmental authorities for as many as 9 years shows total lack of seriousness on the part of the Government and its functionaries to hold inquiry against the petitioner.
The Government thought that its duty was over with the service of charge-sheet and appointment of the Inquiry Officer.
Other functionaries of the department thought that the inquiry initiated against the petitioner was not something which should be taken seriously and, therefore, they virtually slumbered over the matter.
Director of Agriculture, Haryana, went to the extent of recommending to the Government on two occasions that the inquiry be converted from under Rule 7 to one under Rule 8, which relates to the procedure for minor penalties.
The entire approach of the Government and its functionaries has been lopsided and in my opinion long delay of four years in the initiation of inquiry and another nine years in making available the relevant record to the Inquiry Officer is sufficient to draw an inference that the petitioner has been seriously prejudiced due to pendency of the inquiry for over one decade.
The sword of Damocles was kept hanging over the head of the petitioner for more than 10 years as on the date of filing of the writ petition and a period of more than 13 years has elapsed as on date in the context of the charge-sheet dated 14101991.
This long delay is sufficient to wash out the memory of the witnesses and even the delinquent.
He cannot possibly now make out an effective defence.
It will be impossible for him to recollect the happenings of 1976-77 and produce evidence to show that bills submitted by him were duly supported by material facts.
Therefore, it is an eminently fit case in which the respondent should be directed not to proceed with the inquiry.
Continuance of the inquiry after a lapse of more than 13 years calculated with effect from the date of issue of charge-sheet would only aggravate the injury suffered by the petitioner during all these years.
8.
Though it is true that the employer has a right to punish its employee and in cases of public employment, the public interest also demands that guilty servant should be brought to the book, abnormal and unexplained delay of years together in the initiation and/or conduct of the inquiry will justify interference by the Court.
The Court may have to intervene in order to bring an end to the misery of a public servant who is proceeded against in a departmental inquiry which is kept pending for years together without any tangible progress.
9.
In State of M.P. v. Bani Singh, AIR 1990 SC 1308, the Supreme Court has held that the Court can in appropriate case quash the proceedings on the ground that abnormal and unexplained delay in the initiation of inquiry has caused prejudiced to the delinquent.
The present one is a case in which serious injury has already been suffered by the petitioner on account of delayed initiation of the inquiry and also on account of the inquiry having remained pending against him for over 13 years by now.
10.
In view of the above, it must be held that the inquiry initiated against the petitioner in the year 1981 cannot be allowed to continue with any element of justification.
Sufficient prejudice has been caused to the petitioner due to long pendency of inquiry by the respondent and it will be unjust to continue the inquiry when the petitioner has reached at the fag end of his service career and he is likely to retire in two to three years.
11.
For all the reasons mentioned above, the Writ Petition is allowed.
Proceedings of inquiry initiated against the petitioner vide Annexure P-1 are quashed and the respondent is restrained from taking further action in the inquiry.
The petitioner shall get all consequential benefits which may become due to him as a result of quashing of the inquiry proceedings.
Costs made easy.
Petition allowed.