RP Sethi, J - Upon creation of the posts of Tax Assistants, the respondents filed a petition in this Court praying for declaration to the affect that circular dated 3131978 (Annexure P/1) was null and void and that the notification dated 1551978 (Annexure P/2) was discriminatory.
It was further prayed that a direction be issued to the respondents to consider the appellants-respondents for appointment to the posts of Tax Assistants.
The petitioners at the relevant time were serving as Stenographers (Ordinary Grade) in the Income Tax Office at Amritsar.
Brij Raj Sharma and Raj Kumar Arora, respondents, claimed to have passed the UDC Examination held by the Department in the year 1973 and respondent, Kewal Krishan in the year 1977.
The Ministerial establishment in the Income Tax Department was alleged to be consisting of L.D.Cs., UDCs, Head Constables, Supervisors and Stenographers.
A combined seniority list was stated to have been maintained in the office of the Commissioner of Income Tax.
The names of the aforesaid respondents and the UDCs, appeared in the said list.
It was contended that Direct Tax Enquiry Committee had recommended for creation of the posts of Tax Assistants in the grade of Rs. 380-640 between the posts of UDCs, and Tax Inspectors.
On the basis of the aforesaid recommendations, circular dated 3131978 (Annexure P/1) was issued to all the Commissioners of Income Tax for creation of cadre of Tax Assistants to be filled in by promotion from the cadre of UDCs on selection basis.
The qualification prescribed was that the UDC to be eligible for being appointed as Tax Assistant must have rendered minimum service of three years and have secured at least 40 per cent marks in the four specified papers in the Income Tax Department examination.
The respondents grievance was that by issuance of the aforesaid circular they had been excluded for promotion to the posts of Tax Inspectors though they had qualified the examination of Taxation Inspectors by securing more than 50 per cent marks and had also qualified the UDC examination.
The circular (Annexure P/6) was stated to have been issued by the Central Board of Direct Taxation to the effect that the consideration of preparation of the list for promotion to the posts of Taxation Inspectors from the posts of UDC and Stenographers was that the names of qualifying persons were to be arranged in order of seniority based on the length of service in the grade of UDC and Stenographers (O.G.)
in the Department.
It was further prayed that only those who were confirmed in the higher grade should be placed higher to those in the lower grade.
The respondents have alleged that on account of the creation of the posts of Tax Inspectors, they being in higher grade have been deprived of the equal opportunity for being appointed as Tax Inspectors in view of the circular, Annexure P/6.
2.
The writ petition was contested mainly on the ground that the ministerial service in the Income Tax Department consisted of two sub-groups namely :-  1.
L.D.Cs., UDCs, Head Clerks and Supervisors (Grade II and Grade I) : 2.
Stenographers (Ordinary Grade) and Stenographers (Senior Grade).
The persons falling in the sub groups were to be promoted within their respective groups and that the Stenographers were not eligible for promotion as UDCs, Head Clerks and Supervisors.
After passing the Departmental Examination for ministerial staff they could qualify for appearance in the departmental examination for Income Tax Inspectors who were qualified as Group (C) Executive.
The Stenographers (Ordinary Grade) could be promoted as Income Tax Inspectors through the aforesaid specified channel.
The creation of the posts of Tax Assistants did not in any way effect the service conditions of the petitioners and they had no right or occasion to challenge the circular impugned in the writ petition.
3.
The learned Single Judge while disposing of the writ petition came to the conclusion that the impugned notification (Annexure P/1) being violation of the provisions of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution was liable to be set aside.
Relying upon the judgment of the Supreme Court reported in Govind Dattatray Kelkar v. Chief Controller of Imports and Exports, AIR 1967 SC 839, it was held that as the impugned circular amounted to discrimination in the matter of promotion the same was liable to be set aside being violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
The prayer for quashing (Annexure P/2) was, however, declined.
4.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
5.
It was stated at the Bar that all the writ petitioners had by the time the case was argued been promoted to the posts of Income Tax Inspectors.
The learned counsel for the appellant had also relied upon a circular of the Government of India issued on 1101985 by which quota system has been introduced in the seniority for the purposes of promotion to the post of Inspector of Income Tax.
6.
The Supreme Court in Govind Dattatray's case (supra) dealt with the scope of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution and held that reasonable classification for the purposes of appointment or promotion is permissible.
The concept of equality in the matter of promotion can be predicted only when the promotees are drawn from the same source.
The fact as to whether there has been a reasonable classification or not depended upon the facts of each case and the circumstances obtaining at the time the recruitment is made.
7.
In Roshan Lal Tandon v Union of India, AIR 1967 SC 1889, it was held that once the direct recruits and promotees are absorbed in one cadre, they form one class and they cannot be discriminated for the purpose of further promotion to the higher grade.
The learned Single Judge without referring to the facts and circumstances of the case before him ultimately held that the impugned annexure (P/1) was violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution which was liable to be struck down.
8.
In Govind Dattatray's case (supra), the Supreme Court held that when the State makes a classification between the two sources of recruitment, unless the classification is unjust on the fact of it, the onus lies upon the party attacking the classification to show by placing the necessary material before the Court that the said classification was unreasonable and violative of Article 16 of the Constitution Applying the aforesaid test in that case, the Supreme Court rejected the pleas of the petitioners who had claimed that they alongwith others, were promoted before the appointments were made as Assistant Controller subject to the condition that they were approved by the Union Public Service Commission and therefore the direct recruits could not be placed over them either on the principle of ratio or on the principle of rotation and that in doing so, the Government had violated the doctrine of equality.
Placing of the direct recruits over the petitioners in that case was argued to be violative of the doctrine of equality.
9.
In Roshan Lal Tandon's case (supra), the Supreme Court had accepted the plea of the petitioners therein on the ground that at the time when the petitioners and direct recruits were appointed to Grade `D' there was one class in Grade `D' forming of direct recruits and promotees from the cadre of Artisans.
The recruits from both the sources of Grade `D' were integrated into one class and no discrimination could, therefore, be made in favour of recruits from one source as against the recruit of the other source in the matter of promotion to Grade `C'.
10.
In the instant case, however, plea of the appellant is based upon the relevant rule that the ministerial service of the Income Tax Department consists of two sub-groups, namely (1) L.D.Cs., UDCs, Head Clerks and Supervisors (Grades II and Grade I) and (2) the Stenographers (Ordinary Grade) and Stenographers (Senior Grade).
The sub-groups could seek promotion within their respective groups and the Stenographers were not eligible for promotion as UDCs, Head Clerks and Supervisors.
It clearly shows that the facts of the case before the learned Single Judge were distinct.
Otherwise also, creation of the cadre of Tax Assistants in the Income Tax Department having been evolved on the basis of Direct Tax Enquiry Committee could not be held to be either discriminatory or against the principles of law or the rules applicable in the case.
After careful consideration of the case, the Government had decided to create 4148 posts of Tax Assistants in lieu of equal number of posts of UDCs which were directed to be deleted as and when the posts of Tax Assistants were filled up.
The cadre of Tax Assistants was held to be intermediary cadre between the UDCs and Head Clerks.
The creation of the cadre of Tax Assistants was intended to achieve efficiency and the appointments/promotions were to be made on the basis of better qualifications.
The Supreme Court in State of Jammu and Kashmir v. TN Khosa, AIR 1974 SC 1 had held that :-  ``The constitutional code of equality and equal opportunity is a character for equals.
Equality of opportunity in matters of promotion means an equal promotional opportunity for persons who fall, substantially, within the same class.
A classification of employees can, therefore, be made for first identifying and then distinguishing members of one class from those of another.''
The writ petitioners who were stenographers had staked their claim to the posts of Tax Assistants which were likely to be filled up from a distinct sub group were, therefore, not justified in alleging discrimination.
Annexure P/1 itself indicated the purpose for which the cadre of Tax Assistants was created which provided :  ``The intention behind the creation of the new cadre of Tax Assistants, as already indicated in para 1 above, is to provide more experienced and more competent ministerial staff to deal with important aspects of clerical work in the Income-tax Department.
The question of the actual deployment of Tax Assistants has been considered and it has been decided that as far as possible, they should be posted not only in companies and investigation circles, but also in other Income-tax circles such as Central, Special, Estate Duty, Chief Auditor Intelligence Units, Internal Audit Parties, Special Audit Parties, Judicial Benches and other important revenue circles.
The remaining areas of work would continue to be manned by the cadre of Upper Division Clerks.''
11.
To the same effect is the judgment of the Supreme Court in State of Sikkim v. Surendra Prasad Sharma and others, 1994(3) SCT 686 (SC) : 1994(2) SLR 685.
There was, therefore, no justification to hold that the impugned circular was either discriminatory or against the provisions of the constitutional guarantees.
12.
The judgment of the learned Single Judge is also not sustainable because the findings are based upon the assumption that the chance of promotion of an employee was a vested right which could not be infringed.
The Supreme Court in Chandra Gupta v. Secretary, Govt. or India and others, 1995(1) SCT 56 (SC), dealt with this question and held that no employee has right or a vested right to chance of promotion.
13.
In Ram Chandra Shankar Deodhar v. State of Maharashtra, 1974(1) SCC 317, the Supreme Court had already held :  ``It is now well settled that though a right to be considered for promotion is a condition of service mere chances of promotion are not.
A rule which merely affects chances of promotion cannot be regarded as varying a condition of service.
In State of Mysore v. GB Purohit's case the district-wise seniority of sanitary inspectors was changed to State-wise seniority, and as a result of this change, the respondents went down in seniority and became very junior.
This, it was urged, affected their chances of promotion which mere was negatived and Wanchoo, J (as he then was), speaking on behalf of this Court observed.
``It is said on behalf of the respondents that as their chances of promotion have been effected their conditions of service have been changed to their disadvantage.
We see no force in this argument because chances of promotion are not conditions of service.''
14.
Chances of promotion and consideration for promotion are, however, not required to be inter-mingled and have to be distinctly dealt with.
As the judgment of the learned Single Judge has not properly dealt with the proposition of law settled by the Supreme Court, the same cannot be upheld.
For the reasons, stated herein above, the appeal is allowed by setting aside the judgment impugned in this appeal but with no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.