VKJhanji, J - JK Aggarwal, petitioner in this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, is seeking a writ in the nature of Certorari for quashing of decision of the Board of Directors taken in their meeting dated 211991, and order dated 911991 (Annexure P-13) issued by respondent Nos. 6 to the petitioner dismissing him from service, and also for quashing the decision of Board of Directors taken in their meeting held on 26111990, show-cause notice dated 28111990 and the enquiry report dated 22111990 issued by respondent No. 6 against the petitioner.
2.
The petitioner was appointed on 491977 in the Haryana Seeds Development Corporation at Chandigarh (hereinafter referred to as Corporation).
He was placed under suspension vide order dated 18111985, and vide memo dated 26111985, a charge-sheet under Rule 7 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules 1952, (in short, 1952 Rules) was served upon him.
Petitioner submitted his interim reply on 6.12.1985 because according to him, he was not supplied with the copies of the documents.
On the basis of interim reply, the Managing Director appointed one AK Usman as an Enquiry Officer.
The petitioner submitted an application for change of Enquiry Officer.
However, this request was not accepted and the Enquiry Officer submitted his report on 711986.
In the report Enquiry Officer, four charges out of thirteen could not be proved.
The then Managing Director accepted the findings of the Enquiry Officer and in consequence thereof, vide order dated 811986, terminated the services of the petitioner.
This termination order was challenged by the petitioner in this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 258 of 1986.
The writ petition was decided by Hon'ble Mr. Justice MM Punchhi (as his Lordship then was) on 951986, thereby setting aside the termination order.
It was held that :  ``Undeniably the case of the petitioner in order to clarify his pay and other allowances was placed before the Board and it gave its seal of approval, innately approving his appointment.
Thus in sum and substance the appointment of the petitioner was by the Board and there is no getting away from it.''
It was thus held that the Board of Directors were alone the competent authority and the order of termination passed by the Managing Director was void ab-initio.
The contention that action taken by the Managing Director regarding termination of services, was later on approved by the Board, was not accepted.
It was held that ``the Board of Directors in causing approval to the order of termination, have mutely surrendered their powers to the Managing Director.
This is an impossible situation and cannot be given the seal of approval by this Court.
On this score alone, the order of termination of services is bad in law.''
Against this judgment, the Corporation filed Letters Patent Appeal No. 366 of 1986, but the same was dismissed by this Court vide judgment dated 1391988 (Annexure P-6).
Against the decision given in Letters Patent Appeal, the Corporation filed Special Leave Petition No. 11488 of 1988 in the Apex Court, where it was dismissed on 12121988 and the petitioner was allowed to re-join on 13121988.
3.
As a result of dismissal of the Special Leave Petition, the Board of Directors of the Corporation considered the matter afresh in its meeting held on 1531989 and noted that ``the termination orders have been held to be illegal on the short ground that the Managing Director had no authority to terminate the services of the Company Secretary, Mr. JK Aggarwal and felt that it would be advisable to hold fresh enquiry to give another opportunity to the petitioner to participate in the enquiry proceedings and defend his case before the Enquiry Officer''.
In pursuance of this decision of the Board of Directors, respondent No. 6 who was the then Managing Director, issued office order dated 1141989, requesting the Enquiry Officer to conduct the enquiry.
Sh. HC Disodia, Managing Director, Haryana Warehousing Corporation, Chandigarh, was appointed as an Enquiry Officer.
On the basis of this, charge-sheet was issued to the petitioner on 26111985.
Before the Enquiry Officer, petitioner filed an application to allow him to engage a counsel.
Before this application could be decided, the Enquiry Officer was transferred and in his place, Mr. Zile Singh.
respondent No. 2, was appointed as Enquiry Officer.
The application of the petitioner to engage a counsel was dismissed.
On 1291989, petitioner filed an application before the Enquiry Officer, stating therein that the Corporation had no authority to order fresh enquiry against him on the same charges contained in charge-sheet dated 26111985.
Petitioner also stated that he was participating in the enquiry without prejudice to his right of challenging the order dated 881989, whereby his application to engage a counsel had been dismissed.
Thereafter, petitioner by way of Civil Writ Petition No. 13604 of 1989 not only challenged order dated 881989 rejecting his request to engage a counsel, but also sought quashing of proceedings pending before the Enquiry Officer.
The writ petition was dismissed by this Court.
The order of the Enquiry Officer refusing to grant permission to engage a legal practitioner in the enquiry, was set-aside by the Apex Court in Civil Appeal No. 4632 of 1990 and it was held that it was not a proper exercise of discretion under the Rules, which resulted in failure of justice, particularly in view of the fact that Presenting Officer was a person of legal attainments and experience.
Petitioner was allowed to cross-examine all the eight witnesses including Sh. RS Malik, former Managing Director against whom the petitioner had alleged mala fide.
The order of the Supreme Court dated 591990 was modified vide order dated 10.10.1990 to the extent that out of witnesses to be made available for cross-examination, the name of RS Malik was deleted.
However, the Apex Court ordered that if the petitioner seeks to have RS Malik called on his side, the Commissioner might consider the prayer in that behalf, if made, without reference to the embargo placed by the order on examination of further witnesses in the enquiry.
Before the Enquiry Officer, an application was filed to summon RS Malik, but the Enquiry Officer rejected the application vide his order dated 9.11.1990.
Petitioner's application for modifying/reviewing the said order, too was dismissed.
Petitioner submitted his written arguments on 14111990 (annexed with this petition as Annexure P-11).
The Enquiry Officer submitted his report dated 22111990.
According to the petitioner, the same was received in the office of Corporation on 23.11.1990.
24th and 25th of November, 1990 were holidays on account of Saturday and Sunday.
Respondent No. 6 placed this report before the Board of Directors on 26111990 for acceptance by way of supplementary agenda item which was circulated to the Directors during the course of meeting itself.
The extract of the proceedings of the meeting of the Board of Directors of Corporation held on 26111990 has been placed on record by respondent No. 1, and the same has been marked as annexure P-30.
Item No. 16 of the Agenda reads as under :-  ``ITEM No. 16 Departmental enquiry against Sh. JK Aggarwal, Company Secretary, HSDC consideration of the report of the Enquiry Officer.
The Board considered the enquiry report and the findings of the Enquiry Officer on the charges filed against Sh. JK Aggarwal, Company Secretary.
The record of the proceeding and other documents relating to the enquiry were also perused by the Board.
After examination of the report and other record, in detail, the Board accepted the findings of the Enquiry Officer.
It was observed that 9 of the 13 charges levelled against Sh. JK Aggarwal have been established against him.
In respect of charge No. 3, benefit of doubt was given to Sh. JK Aggarwal by the Enquiry Officer and held that the charge is not proved.
The officer was charge-sheeted for imposition of major penalties.
Considering the gravity of the charges that have been proved against the charged officer, the Board was prima facie of the view that the Officer was not a desirable person to be retained in the service.
Accordingly the Board proposed to impose penalty of dismissal from service.
The Board, however, decided to give the charged officer an opportunity of making representation on the penalty proposed to be imposed.
The charged officer shall submit reply to the show cause notice as to why he may not be dismissed from the service within a period of three weeks from the date of issue of notice.
The Officer will be given a personal hearing if necessary, by the Board after the receipt of reply to the show-cause notice.''
In pursuance of the afore-mentioned decision of the Board of Directors, show- cause noticed dated 28111990 was issued by respondent No. 6 for and on behalf of the respondent-Board as to why the penalty of dismissal from service be not imposed on the petitioner.
It was served upon the petitioner on 29111990, and the petitioner was required to submit his reply within three weeks.
On 12121990, petitioner filed an interlocutory application before the Apex Court in Civil Misc. No. 4632 of 1990, for seeking a direction of the Apex Court for summoning RS Malik as a witness.
Since the interlocutory application was listed for motion hearing on 2811991, petitioner submitted an application dated 18121990 before respondents No. 5 and 6 for extending the time for filing reply to show-cause notice.
Extension of time was sought till 2811991 as the interlocutory application was fixed for that date.
Respondents No. 5 and 6 did not give any reply to this application.
In meeting held on 211991, by the Board of Directors, the case of the petitioner was put up by respondent No. 6 by way of supplementary agenda item which was circulated to the Directors who were present, and the Board of Directors decided to impose penalty of dismissal.
In pursuance of decision of the Board of Directors, respondent No. 6 issued order of dismissal, Annexure P-13, which order is being challenged in the writ petition, because due to the order of dismissal the interlocutory application before the Apex Court was rendered infructuous.
4.
The order of dismissal is being sought to be quashed, being illegal, against the rules and regulations and also as a result of mala fide of respondents No. 3 to 7.
5.
Written statement has been filed on behalf of respondents No. 1 and 3, and replies by way of short affidavits have been filed on behalf of respondents No. 2, 8 and 9.
The Corporation in its written statement has denied the allegations made by the petitioner in his writ petition, and has stated that petitioner is not entitled to any relief as claimed in the petition, particularly when legality and propriety of the enquiry initiated vide order 1141989 under the 1952 Rules has been upheld by this Court in C.W.P.
No. 13604 of 1989 on 1511990 as well as Apex Court vide order dated 591990 which was modified vide order dated 10.10.1990, and further in view of the Apex Court's order, the enquiry, after resumption, was completed within the time-frame thereunder to meet with the only grouse of the petitioner, i.e. regarding assistance of legal practitioner.
It has further been stated that no allegations of bais or malice against the Enquiry Officer or regarding his collusion with other respondents, were made during the enquiry proceedings or even in Civil Writ Petition No. 13604 of 1989 in which the petitioner had challenged the holding of fresh enquiry and appointment of the Enquiry Officer.
The charge of collusion between the Enquiry Officer and other respondents made in the writ petition is an after-thought.
The enquiry report is based on the material/evidence brought on record and has been appreciated by the Enquiry Officer while returning his findings in the enquiry report which was duly accepted by the Board of Directors who were fully competent to impose the penalty upon the charged officer, i.e. petitioner, in consonance with the gravity of charge(s) proved against him.
Respondent No. 3 in his written statement has denied the allegations of mala fide levelled against him.
In their short affidavits/replies, respondents No. 2, 8 and 9 have also denied the allegations of mala fide levelled against them.
6.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has raised the following contentions :-  (1) That the charge-sheet issued by the Managing Director on 26111985 could not be made the basis of enquiry as the Board of Directors had not framed any charge-sheet while ordering enquiry; (2) That the petitioner has not been afforded an opportunity to submit his reply to the charge-sheet; (3) That the Enquiry Officer did not allow the petitioner to examine RS Malik who had issued charge-sheet dated 26111985 and against whom, allegations of mala fide have been levelled by the petitioner; (4) That the order of dismissal has been passed without following the requirement of regulations framed by the Corporation which were made applicable w.e.f.
17101989; (5) That the action taken against the petitioner is vitiated by mala fides of respondent No. 3 and 6 who have actively participated in getting decision against the petitioner; (6) That the Corporation acted in indecent haste in placing the enquiry report of the Enquiry Officer by supplementary agenda in the meeting fixed for 26111990; (7) That the enquiry report was forwarded to the Board of Directors, without a copy of the same being supplied to the petitioner.
Petitioner had every right to receive the copy of enquiry report before the Board accepted the findings of the Enquiry Officer and proposed the imposition of penalty of dismissal from service.
In answer to these submissions, learned counsel for the respondents submitted that in the earlier writ petition, order of termination was set aside only on technical grounds, i.e. the Managing Director had no jurisdiction to pass the order of termination as the Board of Directors was found to be the appointing Authority of the petitioner.
Thus, according to the counsel, it was not necessary to frame fresh charge-sheet.
Counsel also submitted that full opportunity of hearing, including leading of evidence, was given to the petitioner by the Enquiry Officer.The Enquiry Officer was holding the enquiry totally in an impartial manner and after having considered the report of the Enquiry officer, order of dismissal was passed against the petitioner.
Counsel also submitted that allegations of mala fide are vague and deserve no notice.
7.
Having heard the learned counsel for the parties at length, I am of the view that it is not necessary to go into all the submissions made by counsel for the petitioner because the writ petition deserves to be allowed on the ground that the petitioner had a right to receive a copy of the enquiry report before the same was accepted by the Board of Directors.
The proceedings of the 75th meeting held on 26111990 make it abundantly clear that record of the proceedings and other documents relating to the enquiry were perused and after examination of the record in detail, the Board accepted the finding of the Enquiry Officer.
In this meeting, the Board prima facie was of the view that the petitioner was not a desirable person to be retained in service and therefore, proposed to impose the penalty of dismissal from service.
After the decision of the Supreme Court in case reported as Union of Indian and others v. Mohd.
Ramzan Khan, 1991(1) SCT 111 (SC) : 1991(1) SCC.
588, the law of disciplinary proceedings has undergone a significant and substantial change.
It often happens that the Inquiry Officer is not the officer empowered by the law or the rules to impose punishment himself.
The enquiry report prepared by the Enquiry Officer is forwarded to the authority who has the right to impose punishment.
On the basis of such enquiry report, punishment is imposed either with or without recommendation as to punishment or as to any particular punishment made by the Enquiry Officer.
Wherever the Enquiry Officer has no right to impose the punishment, all proceedings before him and all recommendations by him are no more than in the nature of advisory material.
It is the mind of the disciplinary Authority itself, or the mind of the punishing authority, that under the law has the sole right or jurisdiction to inflict punishment which affects the right of the employee.
In para-13 of the judgment, it has been noticed by the Supreme Court that ``with the Forty- Second Amendment, the delinquent officer is not associated with the disciplinary inquiry beyond the recording of evidence and the submissions made on the basis of the material to assist the Inquiry Officer to come to his conclusions.
In case his conclusions are kept away from the delinquent officer and the Inquiry Officer submits his conclusions with or without recommendation as to punishment, the delinquent is precluded from knowing the contents thereof although such material is used against him by the disciplinary authority.
The report is an adverse material if the Inquiry Officer records a finding of guilt and proposes a punishment so far as the delinquent is concerned.
In a quasi-judicial matter, if the delinquent is being deprived of knowledge of the material against him though the same is made available to the punishing authority in the matter of reaching his conclusion, rules of natural justice would be affected.
Prof. Wade has pointed out : ``The concept of natural justice has existed for many centuries and it has crystalised into two rules; that no man should be judge in his own cause; and that no man should suffer without first being given a fair hearing.
They (the Courts) have been developing and extending the principles of natural justice so as to build up a kind of code of fair administrative procedure to be obeyed by authorities of all kinds.
They have done this once again, by assuming that Parliament always intends powers to be exercised fairly''.
In the case of the petitioner, it is the admitted position that a copy of the enquiry report was made available to the petitioner only after the Board of Directors had decided to accept the finding of the Enquiry Officer and had decided not to retain the petitioner in service.
The Board had also proposed to impose penalty of dismissal from service.
The petitioner was precluded from knowing the contents of the report, although the same was used against him by the Board.
The contention of learned counsel for the respondents that under Rule 7 of the 1952 Rules, there is no requirement of copy being supplied to the petitioner before acceptance of report by the Board of Directors and that no prejudice has been caused to the petitioner because he was given an opportunity to make representation prior to the passing of order of dismissal against him in Board's meeting dated 211991, cannot be accepted.
The Constitutional Bench of the Apex Court in Managing Director, ECIL, Hyderabad v. B Karunakar, 1994(1) SCT 319 (SC) : JT 1993(6) SC 1, had the occasion to deal with this contention, and it has been so answered in para 30 of the judgment.
The relevant extract of it is reproduced as under :-  ``30.
(i) Since the denial of the report of the Inquiry Officer is a denial of reasonable opportunity and a breach of the principles of natural justice, it follows that the statutory rules, if any, which deny the report to the employee are against the principles of natural justice and therefore, invalid.
The delinquent employee will therefore, be entitled to a copy of the report even if the statutory rules do not permit the furnishing of the report or are silent on the subject.
(ii) xx xx xx (iiii) xx xx xx (iv) In the view that we have taken, viz., that the right to make representation to the disciplinary authority against the findings recorded in the inquiry report is an integral part of the opportunity of defence against the charges and is a breach of principles of natural justice to deny the said right, it is only appropriate that the law laid down in Mohd.
Ramzan Khan's case (supra) should apply to employees in all establishments whether Government or non-government public or private.
This will be the case whether there are rules governing the disciplinary proceedings or not and whether they expressly prohibit the furnishing of the copy of the report or are silent on the subject.
Whatever the nature of punishment, further, whenever the rules require an enquiry to be held, for inflicting the punishment in question, the delinquent employee should have the benefit of the report of the enquiry officer before the disciplinary authority records its findings on the charges levelled against him.
Hence question (iv) is answered accordingly.
(v) xxx xxx xxx.''
Learned Counsel for the respondent-Corporation then contended that in the meeting dated 26111990, the Board had only arrived at a provisional conclusion in regard to penalty to be imposed and final decision to remove him from service was taken only in meeting dated 211991 and that too after the petitioner was heard by the Board.
According to him, before final decision was taken on 211991, copy of the enquiry report was furnished to the petitioner and thus, no prejudice has been caused to the petitioner.
This contention too is devoid of any merit.
The enquiry report was required to be furnished to the petitioner before the Board had accepted the finding of the Enquiry Officer.
The proceedings of the meeting dated 211991 have also revealed that the Board was not enquiring again into the finding of the Enquiry Officer.
This what the Board has stated ``the Board has already accepted the finding of the Enquiry Officer.''
In the meeting dated 26111990, the Board prima facie had also decided to impose penalty of dismissal from service and in the subsequent meeting, decision was taken to dismiss the petitioner from service.
It was thus, a sheer formality and the contention that decision taken in meeting dated 26111990 was only provisional decision, cannot be accepted.
8.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner also contended that Corporation had filed suit for recovery of Rs. 50,992.70 P, on the ground that it suffered losses due to inefficiency, incompetence and negligence of the petitioner, but the Civil Court vide its judgment dated 23111992 ( Annexure P-34) has dismissed the suit.
He thus, submitted that the main charge having fallen to the ground, the other charges are not such which would warrant extreme penalty of dismissal from service.
He referred to the observations of Hon'ble Mr. Justice MM Ponchhi (as his Lordship then was) in the earlier writ petition filed by the petitioner, wherein it has been observed that ``during the course of his working, the petitioner, it appears, treaded on the toes of others.
A pile of charges predominantly pertaining to inefficiency, in subordination, non-maintaining of faithful records and non co-operation with subordinates all pertaining to the petitioner's person were framed against him'', and contended that the petitioner is a victim of circumstances and deserves to be exonerated completely.
Counsel may possibly be right in contending this, but this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India can only go into the procedural correctness of the decision making process.
These contentions can well be agitated before the Board in case it decides to proceed against the petitioner afresh from the stage of furnishing the petitioner with the enquiry report.
9.
For the reasons recorded above, the writ petition is allowed.
The order terminating the services of the petitioner, i.e. Annexure P-13, is set aside with costs.
Costs are quantified at Rs. 5,000/-.
Petitioner allowed.