G S Singhvi, J (Oral) - This petition has been filed by one of the heirs of late Shri Jaspal Singh for issue of a direction to the respondents to pay the retiral benefits of late Shri Jaspal Singh along with interest at the rate of 24% per annum.
2.
The facts mentioned in the writ petition show that the father of the petitioner, late Shri Jaspal Singh, who had joined service on 2711965 as Sub Inspector, Food and Supplies, died on 281978, while he was still in service.
The petitioner has stated that about one month prior to the death of his father, his mother had also expired on 871978 and he was given employment as a dependent of the deceased employee and this provided the source of sustenance to his family, which includes his two sisters and one brother.
The petitioner has alleged that pay scales of the Punjab Government employees were revised with effect from 111978 but the benefit of the revision of pay scales has not been given in the case of his father and although after his death heirs of late Shri Jaspal Singh became entitled to the grant of payment of ex-gratia, family pension etc. no payment has been made to them by the departmental authorities.
The petitioner has stated that a sum of Rs. 5,000/- only was paid to the family of late Shri Jaspal Singh towards ex-gratia and all their efforts to persuade the departmental authorities to pay the amount of family pension etc. have proved futile.
Reference has been made to letters dated 2571984 (Annexure P-5) written by the Food and Supplies Controller, Bhatinda, and Annexure P-6 dated 971985 written by the Director, Food and Supplies, Punjab, to the District Food and Supplies Controller, Bhatinda.
According to the petitioner, notwithstanding the inter-departmental correspondence, actual benefits have not been given to the family members of late Shri Jaspal Singh and in this manner the respondents have deprived them of their property right.
3.
The writ petition was filed in the month of June, 1993.
Notice of motion of the writ petition was served on the respondents in September, 1993.
No reply was filed by the respondents in response to the notice of motion.
After hearing the parties, the writ petition was admitted on 1.10.1993.
By now a period of more than one year and six months has elapsed from the date of filing of the writ petition and a period of more than one year and four months has elapsed since the date of service of notices of the writ petition.
However, the respondents have not chosen to file reply to the writ petition.
In the absence of a written reply, the averments made in the writ petition will have to be treated as correct and the petition will have to be decided on the basis of those averments.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner argued that the amount of ex-gratia, death-cum-retirement gratuity, family pension payable to the heirs of late Shri Jaspal Singh constitute their property and, therefore, a constitutional right is vesting in them to get these benefits and failure of the respondents to make payment of the aforesaid amounts constitutes a flagrant violation of this constitutional right.
He further argued that by not fixing the pay of late Shri Jaspal Singh on the post of Inspector, which he was holding on 111978, the respondents have discriminated him.
Learned Assistant Advocate-General pointed out that no document has been placed by the petitioner on record to show that late Shri Jaspal Singh had been promoted as Inspector and in the absence of such a document the petitioner is not entitled to claim that pay of late Shri Jaspal Singh should be fixed on the post of Inspector.
5.
In my opinion, the controversy on the status of late Shri Jaspal Singh is really not relevant to the claim of the petitioner that the respondents have discriminated him in the matter of fixation of pay.
The record relating to the service of late Shri Jaspal Singh is available with the respondents and, therefore, it is for them to take action for fixation of his pay on the post held by him on 111978.
The fact that late Shri Jaspal Singh had joined service of the Food and Supplies Department in the year 1965 as also as the fact that he died on 281978 during the period of service are not in dispute.
Indeed, it is also not in dispute that pay scales of the employees of the Government of Punjab were revised with effect from 111978 and benefit of this revision of pay scales was not given to late Shri Jaspal Singh.
This may be due to the fact that revision of pay scales was notified after the death of Shri Jaspal Singh.
Nevertheless, the respondents were under a statutory obligation to fix the pay of late Shri Jaspal Singh, who was very much in employment on 111978.
If Shri Jaspal Singh had not died, he would have certainly claimed benefit of the revised pay scale with effect from 111978.
In my considered view, failure of respondents No. 2 and 3 to take appropriate action for fixation of pay of late Shri Jaspal Singh in the revised pay scale with effect from 111978 has resulted in hostile discrimination qua late Shri Jaspal Singh and as one of the legal heirs of late Shri Jaspal Singh the petitioner is entitled to complain of violation of his constitutional right.
The benefits which could have accrued to late Shri Jaspal Singh on the basis of the revised fixation of pay are admissible to his family members and, therefore, there is every justification to issue a direction to the respondents to fix the pay of late Shri Jaspal Singh in the revised pay scale with effect from 111978 and to give consequential benefits to the members of his family.
6.
In so far as the claim of the petitioner that family members of late Shri Jaspal Singh are entitled to the payment of ex-gratia amounting to Rs. 10,000/- and they are also entitled to the benefit of death-cum-retirement gratuity and family pension, no material has been placed on record by the respondents to justify their inaction to make payment of the amounts due to the family of the deceased employee.
Under the Punjab Civil Services Rules Volume II, the Government has formulated family pension scheme 1964 and under that scheme family of a deceased employee is entitled to pension known as family pension.
This scheme, undoubtedly, created a right in favour of the family of late Shri Jaspal Singh and a corresponding duty on the competent authority to arrange for payment of family pension.
Failure of the respondents to take appropriate steps in this regard has indirectly resulted in depriving the family members of late Shri Jaspal Singh of their valuable right to property.
7.
A Division Bench of this Court held in Bhagwant Singh v. Union of India, AIR 1962 Punjab 503, that pension payable to an employee constitutes his property.
The same view was expressed by a Full Bench of this Court in K R Erry v. State of Punjab, ILR (1967) 1 Punjab and Haryana 278.
The law laid down by this Court was approved by the Supreme Court in Deokinandan Prasad v. State of Bihar, A.I.R. 1971 SC 1409.
The Supreme Court held that pension is not a bounty payable on the sweetwill and pleasure of the Government and that the right to pension is a valuable right vesting in a Government servant.
The Supreme Court further held that right to receive pension is property under Article 31(1) and by a mere executive order the State has no power to withhold the same.
The Court also declared that right to receive pension is property under Article 19(1)(f) of the Constitution and it is not saved by sub-article (5) of Article 19.
In regard to the right of the employee to get pension, the Court observed-  ``The grant of pension does not depend upon an order being passed by the authorities to that effect.
It may be that for the purposes of quantifying the amount having regard to the period of service and other allied matters, it may be necessary for the authorities to pass an order to that effect, but the right to receive pension flows to the officer employee not because of the said order but by virtue of the Rules.''
Judgment of this Court in K R Erry's case (supra) was upheld by the Supreme Court in State of Punjab v. K R Erry and Sobhag Raj Mehta, 1972 S.L.R.
836.
The same view has been reiterated in State of Punjab and another v. Kirpal Singh Bhatia and others, AIR 1976 SC 2459.
While reiterating the same principle in State of Kerala and others v. M Padmanabhan Nair, AIR 1985 SC 356, the Supreme Court held that delay in payment of retiral dues entitles an employee a right to claim interest at the market rate.
8.
Even though right to property can no more be regarded as a fundamental right in view of the 42nd Amendment of the Constitution, this right continues to be recognised as a constitutional right in view of the provisions of Article 300-A Therefore, deprivation of property without any legal sanction would amount to violation of constitutional right.
9.
The decisions of the Supreme Court and of this Court, to which a reference has been made hereinabove, no doubt relate to the claim of the retired employees to pension, gratuity etc. but I have little hesitation in taking the view that the ratio of those decisions is fully applicable to a case in which family of the deceased employee makes a claim for family pension and other dues payable to them after the death of the employee.
If pension has been regarded as property, there is no reason to exclude the family pension from the ambit of the term `property'.
It must, therefore, be held that withholding of family pension and other retirement dues payable to late Shri Jaspal Singh amounts to depriving the members of his family of their rights without any legal authority.
10.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to -  (i) fix the pay of late Shri Jaspal Singh in the revised pay scale with effect from 111978 and to give the benefit of arrears to the family members of Shri Jaspal Singh within a period of two months from today; (ii) determine the family pension and other dues payable to the family of late Shri Jaspal Singh within a period of three months and pay the arrears within the next one month; and (iii) to pay interest at the rate of 18% on the entire amount of arrears.
It is further made clear that if the amounts due to the family members of late Shri Jaspal Singh are not paid within the period fixed in this order, they shall become entitled to the payment of interest at the rate of 24% on the said amounts with effect from the date of this order and in that event the amount of interest shall have to be recovered from the salary of that officer who may be found guilty of non-compliance of this order.
11.
Since the family members of late Shri Jaspal Singh have been deprived of the benefits like family pension, gratuity etc. for a period of more than one and a half decades and there is no tangible explanation for this delay, the respondents should pay costs of Rs. 2,000/- to the petitioner.