NK Kapoor, J.- This order will dispose of Regular Second Appeal Nos. 1180 to 1182 of 1989, the same having been directed against the common judgment and decree dated 21.12.1988 passed by the Additional District Judge, Patiala, whereby the appeals filed by the respondents were accepted thereby dismissing the suit of the plaintiff-appellant.
2.
Plaintiff filed a suit for declaration that he is senior to defendant- respondents and the rejection of his representation on 19111979 is illegal, ultra vires, unconstitutional, mala fide, null and void and against the principles of natural justice and also against the service rules and regulations governing the services of the plaintiff and so he is entitled to be considered and promoted to the post of Executive Engineer over and above defendants No4 to 6 with a further prayer that defendatns No. 1 to 3 be restrained from promoting defendants 4 to 6 without considering the claim of the plaintiff to the post of Executive Engineer.
3.
According to the plaintiff, he joined the Punjab Electrical Inspectorate Office on 3011976 whereas Mr. Amarjit Singh Walia, Assistant Engineer, joined 1021976.
Similarly, Amarjit Singh Sidhu and Mr. TN Sharma too joined as Assistant Engineer on 1321976.
Defendant Hardev Singh Sidhu joined as Assistant Engineer in the month of April, 1976.
Since the plaintiff was selected as Assistant Engineer on ad hoc basis on 23121973, he is entitled to tag the said period to his seniority.
In support of his contention, reference was made to Rule 7 and 7(a) of the Punjab Service of Engineers (Electricity Branch) (Conditions of Service) Rules, 1939.
His representation dated 791979 for acceptance of his claim was rejected by the government on 19111979 which was also termed to be illegal, ultra vires, unconstitutional, mala fide and against the principles of natural justice.
With these broad averments in the plaint, plaintiff sought necessary declaration and injunction as noticed above.
4.
Defendants No. 1 to 3 filed written statement.
Similarly, defendants No. 4 and 5 also filed separate written statement.
Defendant No. 6 was proceeded ex parte.
Defendants No. 1 to 3 in their written statement while accepting the contention of the plaintiff that the provisions contained in Punjab Service of Engineers (Electricity Branch) (Conditions of Service) Rules, 1939 (for short `1939 Rules') governs the seniority of the members of service as well as rival defendants; took up the stand that plaintiff was no right to claim the post by promotion.
According to the answering defendants, they had right to make selection amongst the eligible officers for filling up the aforesaid posts by promotion alone and it does not bestow any right on any eligible officer to be promoted as Executive Engineer.
Referring to Rule 7-A (2) of 1939 Rules; it was stated that the posts of Executive Engineers are to be filled by selection and not on consideration of seniority alone.
Replying to the representation dated 791979 made by the plaintiff, it was stated that the same was rightly and justifiably rejected by the answering defendants on 19111979.
Thus, it was stated that the suit is devoid of merit and is liable to be dismissed with costs.
5.
Defendants No. 4 and 5 besides controverting the various material averments made in the plaint, took up few preliminary objections as well.
According to the answering defendants, plaintiff is guilty of suppressing the true facts from the court and on this basis alone, the present suit deserves to be dismissed.
As per defendants, the plaintiff from the beginning was treated to be junior to defendant Nos. 4 to 6.
It is with a view to assail the same that the plaintiff filed a representation in this regard which was rejected by the government on 19111979.
This order dated 19111979 has not been challenged by the plaintiff.
Even otherwise, as per merit list prepared by the Public Service Commission and conveyed to the Punjab Government vide communication dated 2131976, the plaintiff was shown to be junior to the private defendants.
On this ground also, the suit of the plaintiff is not within limitation.
Even otherwise, the plaintiff as well as defendants No. 4 to 6 were confirmed as Assistant Engineers vide notification dated 1.6.1979.
Even as per these confirmation orders, the plaintiff has been shown junior to defendants No. 4 to 6.
The defendants denied that they are governed by the 1939 Rules.
Since seniority after confirmation was fixed according to order dated 1.6.1979, the suit of the plaintiff was stated to be barred by time.
6.
On the pleadings of the parties, following issues were framed :-  (1) Whether plaintiff is entitled to declaration prayed?
OPP.
(2) Whether the suit is not maintainable?
OPD.
(3) Whether the suit of the plaintiff is time barred?
OPD.
(4) Whether valid notice under Section 80 CPC has been issued before the suit, if not, to what effect?
OPP.
(5) Whether the suit has become infructuous?
OPD  (6) Relief.
7.
On the basis of evidence led, the trial Court decided issues No. 1 and 4 in favour of the plaintiff.
Issues No. 2 and 3 were decided against the defendants.
Issue No. 5 was partly decided in favour of the defendants and consequently the suit of the plaintiff was partly decreed.
8.
Before the lower appellate Court, findings of the trial Court in respect of issues No. 1 and 3 were challenged.
It was stated that the suit of the plaintiff was clearly barred by time and so the finding of the trial Court deserves to be reversed.
It was contended by the appellants that the plaintiff's representation to consider him to be senior to the defendants was rejected on 19111979 and thus the suit could be filed within a period of three years from this date.
Since the suit was filed on 27111983 i.e. long after the expiry of period of limitation prescribed, it was barred by time.
As regards the issue relating to seniority of the plaintiff, it was urged that seniority of the plaintiff and private defendants was, in fact, determined by the Public Service Commission at the time when their names were forwarded to the department.
Thus it was known to the plaintiff that as per merit list prepared by the Public Service Commission, he was junior to the answering defendants.
Being fully aware of this factual position and with a view to get redressal, the plaintiff submitted a representation dated 791979 which was rejected on 19111979 which also was conveyed to the plaintiff in December, 1979.
It was next contended that the trial Court erred in law in applying service Rules of 1939.
According to the appellants, these rules are not applicable to the parties as neither their appointments were made under Rules 1939 nor there is any mention to the posts of Assistant Engineers in Appendix `A' attached to service Rules of 1939.
According to the appellants, the posts for which they had applied for and considered were in the office of Chief Electrical Inspectorate.
Even as per requisition submitted, it was clearly stated that no rules were prescribed for the post.
It is with this background that the Punjab Public Service Commission interviewed the plaintiff and the defendants and finally recommended the names of the plaintiff and defendants determining their merit inter se.
9.
The lower appellate Court examined these contentions in the light of material documents adduced in evidence by the parties and came to the conclusion that the suit of the plaintiff was not within limitation.
It was also held that the Rules 1939 do not govern the parties.
Resultantly, the appeals filed by the appellants were accepted thereby setting aside the judgment and decree of the trial Court.
10.
Learned counsel for the appellant has assailed the judgment and decree of the lower appellate Court terming it to be wholly illegal and unjust.
According to the appellant, the finding of the lower appellate Court that the suit of the plaintiff is barred by limitation is wholly erroneous.
According to the appellant, till today no seniority list has been finalised by the State.
This being the position, the declaration sought could not be declined by the Court on the bar of limitation.
Challenging the conclusion of the lower appellate Court that 1939 Rules are not applicable, it was urged that the same is contrary to the material evidence placed on record by the parties as well as to the admitted stand of defendants No. 1 to 3 (State of Punjab and the department).
In fact, there has never been a dispute between the parties that they were or not governed by the 1939 Rules.
This finding of the lower appellate Court was unsustainable in law.
11.
Taking up the issue of limitation, it was urged that the cause of action accrued to the plaintiff when the post of Executive Engineer was created and had fallen vacant.
Till such time the plaintiff was not being deprived of his right to be promoted to a higher post on the basis of seniority and so the suit of the plaintiff was within limitation.
Rejection of his representation in this regard on 19111979 was, in fact, wholly inconsequential.
The Court below erred in law in construing the rejection of his representation to be a bar for his right to claim promotion on the basis of seniority, which, in fact, has not been determined till the filing of the suit.
According to the learned counsel for the appellant, even otherwise such like injury gives a recurring cause to the plaintiff and from this view also the legitimate claim of the plaintiff could not be denied on a technical plea of limitation.
In support of his contention, reliance was placed on the judgment in case reported as Laxmanrao Madhavrao Jahagirdar v. Shriniwas  Linjo Nadgir, AIR 1927 Privy Council 217 and State of Madhya Pradesh v. Syed Qamarali, 1967 S.L.R.
228.
12.
Learned counsel for the respondents in support of the conclusion arrived at by the lower appellate Court urged that the same is according to law requiring no interference at this stage.
According to the counsel, seniority inter se parties was, in fact, determined by the Public Service Commission in its recommendation dated 3071975 pursuance to which plaintiff as well as private defendants joined the office of Chief Electrical Inspectorate on probation and later on was confirmed as Assistant Engineer Class-II vide order No. 1/52/79-IW(5)/Notification dated 1.6.1979.
In this confirmation order, plaintiff has been shown to be junior to defendants No. 4 to 6.
The plaintiff at no time challenged this order dated 1.6.1979 and has rightly been held to be now precluded from assailing the same after the expiry of period of limitation.
Even if the period is taken from the date of rejection of his representation on 19111979, the suit filed on 27.11.83 is clearly barred by limitation.
In support of this plea reliance was placed upon the decision in case reported as State of Punjab v. Gurdev Singh and Ashok Kumar, 1991(3) SCT 488 (SC) : AIR 1992 SC 111.
13.
Even with regard to the other issues, i.e. whether parties were governed by Rules 1939 or not, it was stated that they were not appointed under the 1939 Rules as is clear from the appointment letter Exhibit P-2.
Reference was also made to the various conditions as stipulated in the appointment letter to highlight that the same nowhere conforms to the alleged provisions contained in 1939 Rules.
Criticizing the stand taken by the State in its written statement, it was urged that the same is, in fact, contrary to the material evidence on record.
Reference was made to Exhibit DX/18 dated 29.11.1972, a letter written to Chief Secretary, Punjab, to the effect that there were no rules for the technical staff in the office of the Chief Electrical Inspectorate and so some model rules be considered.
Similarly, as per Exhibit DX/14, it was stated by the department that no such rules exist.
Even clarification sought by the Public Service Commission from the government was not furnished.
With this background and especially in view of the document Exhibit DX/1 vide which five posts of Assistant Engineers in the office of Chief Electrical Inspectorate were requisitioned, it was mentioned that no rules were prescribed, clearly proves that the State has, in fact, taken a contradictory stand to the documentary evidence adduced in evidence by the answering respondents.
Refuting the contention of the appellants to be senior to the defendants, it was urged that as per the recommendation submitted by the Public Service Commission, the plaintiff was shown to be junior to the answering defendants which fact was well known to him when he joined the office pursuance to the appointment letter issued by the government.
Even subsequently, the same was duly reflected in the confirmation letter.
No grievance was made by the plaintiff with regard to it.
It is subsequently that he filed a representation in this regard which has been rightly rejected by the defendants with the department on 19111979.
Thus, it was stated that the appeal is wholly devoid of merit and deserves to be dismissed with costs and prayed accordingly.
14.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the various documents referred to during their submissions.
Plaintiff has been non-suited on two material issues, namely, the suit is barred by limitation and; that his appointment letter belies his assertion that the parties are governed by Rules 1939.
15.
Vide appointment letter Exhibit P-2, plaintiff and the answering defendants were directed to report for duty in the office of Chief Electrical Inspectorate Punjab within a fortnight from the receipt of communication.
Various terms and conditions were duly stipulated.
Pursuance to this appointment letter, plaintiff as well as Mr. Amarjit Singh Sidhu and Mr. TN Sharma joined within the stipulated period whereas Mr. HS Sidhu joined on 1741976.
According to the plaintiff, since he joined on 1021976, few days earlier to the answering defendants, was thus senior to the defendants in terms of Rule 7-A of the Rules and thus was entitled to the declaration sought from the Court.
This stand of the plaintiff is not in consonance with the stipulation as contained in appointment letter.
As per appointment letter, each one of them was given a fortnight to join the post, pursuance to which plaintiff joined on 1021976 whereas Mr. Amarjit Singh Sidhu, Mr. TN Sharma and Hardev Singh Sidhu joined on 1321976; 1321976 and 1741976 respectively.
There is no dispute that Mr. Amarjit Singh and Mr. TN Sharma joined within the stipulated time.
As regards Mr. HS Sidhu, he has stated that he had been granted extension for joining the post and this way no fault can be found with his placement in the seniority as determined by the Public Service Commission.
The lower appellate Court rightly came to the conclusion that there is no merit in this contention of the plaintiff.
16.
Public Service Commission recommended the names of the plaintiff and defendants in the order of merit, pursuance to which he joined the service and was ultimately confirmed.
A bare perusal of the communication addressed by the department to Public Service Commission and vice versa, no reference was made to the rules, if any, applicable to the post under consideration.
The lower appellate Court has, in fact, adverted to the various documents which clearly belies the new stand of the State that Rules 1939 govern the post in issue and rightly so.
It has not been urged by the appellant that various communications duly noticed by the lower appellate Court were either on account of ignorance or oversight.
This being the position, reliance cannot be placed upon the present stand of the State that the 1939 Rules govern the conditions of service of the plaintiff and the answering defendants.
A perusal of the requisition made to fill up the vacancies in the office of the Chief Electrical Inspectorate and the communication addressed to and from the Public Service Commission leaves no manner of doubt that till such time 1939 Rules did not govern the service of the plaintiff.
In any case, this was the stand of the State.
Even otherwise, it the terms and conditions of the appointment letter are compared with the conditions of Service Rules, 1939, the former do not conform with the latter.
Had the Rules 1939 been applicable, the appointment letter would not have prescribed the conditions which are at variance with the service Rules.
The appellant cannot claim much support from Rule 21 of 1979 Rules repealing and saving provision which reads as under :-  "21.
The Punjab Service of Engineers (Electricity Branch) (Recruitment) Rules, 1939, published with Punjab Government, Industries and Labour Department (Electricity Branch).
Notification No. 2471-FI-38/253, dated 4th January, 1939, and the Punjab Service of Engineers (Electricity Branch) (Conditions of Service) Rules, 1939 published with Punjab Govt., Industries and Labour Department (Electricity Branch) Notification No. 2471-FI-38/254, dated 4th January, 1939, applicable to the Punjab Electrical Inspectorate, are hereby repealed : Provided that any order issued or any action taken under rules so repealed shall be deemed to have been issued or taken under the corresponding provisions of these rules".
No doubt, it refers to repeal of notification dated 411939 also.
The recruitment Rules of 1939 or Conditions of Service Rules, 1939, do not specifically make mention of the office of Chief Electrical Inspectorate.
Thus, I find no merit in this contention of the appellants.
17.
As regards the plea of limitation, according to the plaintiff, he can wait till such time when an order, though illegal, is being enforced against him.
Viewed in the context of the present controversy, it was stated that drawing of merit list by the Public Service Commission or rejection of the representation filed by the plaintiff nowhere debars him seeking the declaration as no seniority list was circulated nor any such post fell vacant before such time.
18.
Admittedly, the plaintiff joined the service pursuance to the appointment letter issued as per recommendation of the Public Service Commission.
Public Service Commission determined the seniority of the parties which further was reiterated while confirming them.
It was thus known to the parties way back in the year 1979 that each one of them was confirmed from an identical date.
It is with a view to get him declared as senior to the private defendants that a representation was submitted by the plaintiff which was rejected by the department on 19111979 and communication of which was also sent to him in December, 1979.
The lower appellate Court has reached to the conclusion that the plaintiff knew of the rejection of the representation.
Thus the cause of action had accrued to the plaintiff to get the necessary declaration if he felt aggrieved.
Plaintiff's reliance that the suit is within limitation is upon the decision of the apex Court in Syed Qamarali's case (supra).
It was the case of the plaintiff that in view of the decision of the larger Bench of the Supreme Court in Syed Qamarali's case (supra), later view of the apex Court in case reported as State of Punjab v. Gurdev Singh and Ashok Kumar, 1991(3) SCT 488 (SC) : AIR 1991 SC 2219: AIR 1992 SC 111, be not preferred.
During arguments, it was contended that the earlier view in Syed Qamarali's case (supra) was not over-ruled by the latter Bench.
19.
The apex Court in para 9 of the judgment noticed the facts of the case as well as its conclusion.
The Court noticed that Syed Qamarali brought the suit within the period of limitation.
As per facts, it was noticed that he was dismissed on December 2, 1945 and the appeal filed was rejected by the provincial Government on April 9, 1947; whereas the suit was filed on December 8, 1952.
Since residuary Article 120 of the Limitation Act, 1908 prescribes 6 years from the date when cause to sue accrue (now reduced to three years as per Article 113), the same was within limitation.
Thus, the earlier decision also is in no way contrary to the view now taken in Gurdev Singh's case (supra).
20.
Viewed in the context of the present facts, the decision of the apex Court in Gurdev Singh's case (supra) squarely covers the point in issue.
According to this decision of the apex Court, it is incumbent upon the party to get ride of an illegal or ultra vires of wrongful act within the prescribed period of limitation.
As per apex Court, even if when the order is illegal, the same infringes plaintiff's rights and so is incumbent upon him to get it declared so by seeking necessary declaration.
At least such an illegal or void order has a de facto operation unless and until it is declared to be void or illegal by a competent Court.
Commenting upon the usual plea that a void order is non-est and thus a suit to get it declared so is not governed by law of limitation, it would be appropriate to reproduce the observations of the apex Court in Para No. 4 of the judgment in Gurdev Singh's case (supra), which are as under :-  "First of all, to say that the suit is not governed by the law of limitation runs a foul of our Limitation Act.
The statute of limitation was intended to provide a time limit for all suits conceivable.
Section 3 of the Limitation Act provides that a suit, appeal or application instituted after the prescribed "period of limitation" must subject to the provisions of Ss.
4 to 24 be dismissed although limitation has not been set up as a defence.
Section 2(j) defines the expression "period of limitation" to mean the period of limitation prescribed in the Schedule for suit, appeal or application.
Section 2(j) also defines, "prescribed period" to mean the period of limitation computed in accordance with the provisions of the Act.
The Court's function on the presentation of plaint is simply to examine whether, on the assumed facts, the plaint is within time.
The Court has to find out when the "right to sue" accrued to the plaintiff.
If a suit is not covered by any of the specific articles prescribing a period of limitation, it must fall within the residuary article.
The purpose of the residuary Article is to provide for cases which could not be covered by any other provision in the Limitation Act.
The residuary Article is applicable to every variety of suits not otherwise provided for.
Article.
113 (corresponding to Art. 120 of the Act, 1908) is a residuary Article for cases not covered by any other provisions in the Act.
It prescribes a period of three years when the right to sue accrues.
Under Art. 120 it was six years which has been reduced to three years under Article 113.
According to the third column in Article 113, time commences to run when the right to sue accrues.
The words "right to sue" ordinarily mean the right to seek relief by means of legal proceedings.
Generally, the right to sue accrues only when the cause of action arises, that is, the right to prosecute to obtain relief by legal means.
The suit must be instituted when the right asserted in the suit is infringed or when there is a clear and unequivocal threat to infringe that right by the defendant against whom the suit is instituted (See: (i) Mt Bolo v. Mt Koklan, AIR 1930 PC 270 and (ii) Gannon Dunkerley and Co. v. Union of India, AIR 1970 SC 1433)".
21.
Thus, as per facts on record, it would be safe to infer that the cause of action accrued firstly when Public Service Commission recommended the names of the plaintiff and the answering defendants in the order of merit, which was further reflected in the appointment letter issued as well as their confirmation on an identical date.
Not only this, plaintiff's representation to get redressal of this grievance too was rejected sometime in November, 1979, decision of which was communicated to him in December, 1979.
Thus, the lower appellate Court rightly came to the conclusion that the suit of the plaintiff was not within limitation.
22.
In these circumstances, I find no infirmity in the impugned judgment and decree of the lower appellate Court.
Thus, finding no merit in these appeals, the same are dismissed.
Parties, however, to bear their own costs.
Appeal dismissed.