VS Aggarwal, J - Makhan Singh worked as an employee of Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana (hereinafter described as the respondent), The Selection Committee held a meeting on January 9, 1974.
After considering various records, appellant Makhan Singh was not promoted to the post of Assistant while certain persons junior to him were promoted.
The appellant made representation which was rejected.
Once again, the Selection Committee held a meeting in August, 1974 but the appellant was not considered fit to be promoted and the representation again failed.
2.
The appellant filed civil suit seeking a declaration that he was eligible for being considered and promoted for the post of the Assistant with effect from January 17, 1974.
The act of the respondent in ignoring the appellant was described as mala fide with the sole object to punish him for his taking part in the activities of the Union.
3.
Needless to say that the suit was contested by the respondent.
The assertion that the act of the respondent was mala fide was denied.
It was pointed out that after the appellant was promoted to the post of Accountant, he did not prove himself worthy of holding the post of Accountant and had failed to pass the test which was obligatory for the Accountant to qualify.
It was clarified that the test was not meant for further promotion.
4.
Learned Subordinate Judge on June 14, 1978 dismissed the suit holding that the appellant had right only be considered for promotion and once he was not found suitable, the prayed decree for declaration could not be granted.
The first appeal preferred was dismissed by the learned Additional District Judge, Ludhiana on March 20, 1979.
5.
It had been urged that the promotion based on appraisal of service record is arbitrary and it is bound to cause injustice as entries in character roll depend on the whims of the recording officer.
6.
It is true that the service record contains remarks which may not be at times fully justified.
But this is well recognised system of adjudging the merit of an official.
In the case of Parvez Qadir v. Union of India reported as 1975(4) Supreme Court Cases 318, while considering similar submission, the Court observed thus :  "It is true that confidential records do not sometimes give a true picture due to the vagaries of the recording officer.
The human fallibility and want of objectivity in the superior officer are factors which cannot be eliminated altogether.
For that matter one can ask what method is perfect?
For this reason, certain safeguards have been provided in order to make them as objective as possible.
If there is an adverse entry against any officer that officer is given an opportunity to explain.
After the explanation is given, the superior officer as well as the Government ultimately decide whether that remark by the recording officer was justified or not, and if it is not justified the Government can always order its deletion.
Sometimes vagary may enter into the service confidential, and it cannot be postulated that all superior officers who have been empowered to finalise such entries will suffer from any of those traits because the actions of the officer concerned may not have any immediate impact upon him and consequently his sense of objectivity will not be dimmed or strained.
In our view, often enough, the entries in confidential records are themselves an insignia of the capacity and capability of the maker as a superior officer as well as a commentary on the quality of the officer against whom that confidential remark is being noted".
Therefore, in the face of the aforesaid plea so much thought of by the learned counsel for the appellant must fail.
Necessarily.
Confidential reports and other factors have to be taken into consideration while promoting an official.
7.
At the same time, it can well be mentioned that in normal circumstances, the Court is not to assume role of the Selection Committee.
Ordinarily, if an officer is not found to be fit and he challenges the selection on the ground of wrong evaluation by the Selection Committee the Court would not interfere and reassess the merit.
The Court cannot substitute its own opinion and play role of Selection Committee and make the selection.
8.
Not two cases would be alike.
But to the same effect are the observations of the Supreme Court in the case of Dalpat Abasaheb Solunke and others v. Dr. BS Mahajan and others, reported as 1990(1) Supreme Court Cases 305.
In para No. 12 the Supreme Court gave the following findings :-  "It is needless to emphasise that it is not the function of the Court to hear appeals over the decisions of the Selection Committees and to scrutinize the relative merits of the candidates.
Whether a candidate is fit for a particular post or not has to be decided by the duly constituted Selection Committee which has the expertise on the subject.
The Court has no such expertise.
The decision of the Selection Committee can be interfered with only on limited grounds, such as illegality or patent material irregularity in the constitution of the Committee or its procedure vitiating the selection, or proved mala fides affecting the selection etc."  With this background that the Court by itself ordinarily is not to reassess the evaluation of the Selection Committee, one can travel to the basic facts and the pleas raised by the appellant.
9.
Attention of the appellant's learned counsel had been drawn to the adverse entries in the record of the appellant for the period 141972 to 3151973.
Head of the Department recorded.
He needs to be more quick in clearing his seat.
In extra time he can attend to union activities."
To state therefore that the record of the appellant was un-blemished would not be correct.
The feeble attempt thus made by the appellant's learned counsel that the adverse entry was not conveyed and therefore should not be read against the appellant indeed is without substance.
The appellant admitted during his cross-examination that he had noted the said entry.
In other words, he was aware of the contents of adverse entry which had been recorded for the period uptill May 31, 1973.
The very purpose of conveying the adverse entry to an official is to make him aware as to what is recorded in his confidential report by his superior so that he can represent against the said adverse entry to the concerned authorities.
In the present case, the said adverse entry had been noted by the appellant.
In other words, he was fully conscious as to what were the remarks against him.
Now he cannot turn out to retrace the steps and urge that the said entry was not conveyed to him separately.
No prejudice has been caused on this count because the appellant was aware of the contents of the adverse entry.
10.
The appellant's claim to equate that he is a Tolpudle martyr and has suffered because of his activities of the Union does not find much support.
Keeping in view the performance of the appellant when mala fides in the present case are not proved, he himself has to blame for loosing promotion at an appropriate time because of his own act and conduct.
The mode of appointment admittedly was seniority-cum-merit and in the face of the fact that at appropriate time, confidential reports of the appellant were not upto the mark and his juniors were promoted, his claim seeking declaration was rightly rejected.
11.
With the legal plea failing and the Court not to substitute its own opinion to that of the department committee, the conclusion is inescapable that the appeal is without merit.
For these reasons, the appeal fails and is dismissed with costs.
Appeal dismissed.