B A Khan, J. - It was by a sheer chance that an issue of substantial importance cropped up in this petition i.e. whether an order signed by the Addl.
Chief Secretary (Home) can be treated to be an order validly passed by the Govt. and whether the court can go behind such order to find out if, it has been, in fact, passed by the Govt. ?
The matter involves survey and scrutiny of constitutional provisions, Business Rules of the Govt. and above all decisions of the Supreme Court.
2.
Petitioner is a D.I.G.
in the Armed Wing of the State Police Force posted at Jammu.
A signal was issued by respondent No. 2 vide CP/PP-I/93/4362-65 dated July 13, 1993 conveying as under :-  ``The Govt. has approved the transfer of Shri Muni Lal Addl.
DIG CID as Addl.
DIG Armed Police Jammu in place of Shri O P Bhaskar who has been posted as OSD in the CID Headquarters.
Shri Muni Lal will report at the new place of posting on July 14, 1993 to relieve Shri Bhaskar who will report in the CID HQRS on July 17, 1993 under intimation to all concerned.''
3.
Petitioner challenges this signal broadly on the grounds that respondent No. 2 (Director General of Police) is not competent to transfer him and that order impugned was actuated by mala fides.
4.
On consideration, a notice of show-cause was issued to respondents on July 16, 1993 and petitioner's transfer to Srinagar was ordered to be stayed for two weeks.
Respondents were also required to file their objections within the time prescribed.
But instead of filing objections within time, they allegedly installed Muni Lal on the post of DIG prompting petitioner to send a wireless message to respondent No. 1 seeking his intervention and stating, inter alia, that he could not be transferred by an order of the D.G.P., but only by a valid Government order which had not been received by him.
He thereafter filed contempt petition No. 184/1993 on August 20, 1993 alleging defiance of court order dated July 16, 1993 and showing from record of the police Control Room that he was functioning as DIG on and after the stay order was passed by the court.
As a result, this court by order dated Sept 1, 1993 restrained respondent No. 2 from causing any interference in his functioning as DIG Armed Police, Jammu.
This order was faithfully complied with by the respondents.
It transpired in the meanwhile that they had filed objections to the writ petition supported by an affidavit by respondent No. 2, denying that petitioner's transfer emanated from any mala fide considerations and taking the stand that it had been ordered by the Govt. and not by respondent No. 2.
No order of the Government was attached to the objections or placed on record.
Nor was any such order communicated to petitioner.
Therefore, it became necessary to direct learned Counsel for respondents Mr. R C Gandhi, AAG, to produce a copy of the Govt. order.
He submitted an original typed copy of the order signed by Mr. Mehmood Rahman, Addl.
Chief Secretary (Home) J&K Srinagar in compliance which is extracted hereunder :-  ``GOVERNMENT OF JAMMU AND KASHMIR HOME DEPARTMENT.
SUBJECT :- TRANSFER/POSTING OF D.I.Gs.
...
Sanction is accorded to the transfer/posting of Shri Muni Lal, Addl.
DIG CID as Addl.
DIG JKAP Jammu.
Shri O P Baskar is transferred and posted as OSD in CID Hqrs.
By order of the Govt. of Jammu and Kashmir  Sd/-...... (M Rahman)  Addl.
Chief Secretary (Home) J&K Srinagar.
Dated: 13.7.1993 No : Home-PB-1-93.
Copy to the :- 1.
Director General of Police, J&K, Srinagar.
2.
Addl.
D.G.CID J&K Srinagar.
3.
Govt. order file.''
5.
After this order was placed on record on Sept 16, 1993, doubts were raised about its genuineness as it did not carry any Government order No. and also did not tally with the form in which Govt. orders are usually passed.
Consequently, the court recorded on Sept 20, 1993 as under :-  ``...
In view of the doubts raised about the genuineness of the order, it becomes necessary to call for the record on the basis of which it was passed.
It also remains to be seen whether this order partakes the character of Govt. order and whether the Govt. order is required to be approved by the Administrative Council or Adviser or Governor, as the case may be.
In view of this, Mr. Gandhi submits that he would produce the available relevant record to satisfy the court about the genuineness of the order and also address the court about the requirements of a Govt. order and the process which is followed in its passing.''
6.
When this matter was taken up for hearing on Oct 4, 1993, Mr. Gandhi pleaded his inability to produce the record which he had volunteered to produce on Sept 20, 1993.
He gave no explanation for non-production of record and proceeded to place whole hog reliance on the provisions of Section 45(2) of the State Constitution to contend that as the controversial order had been signed by the Addl.
Chief Secretary (Home), who was one of the designated officers to authenticate every Govt. order or instrument, it was as good as an order passed by the Govt. and its validity could not be called in question on the ground that it is not an order made or executed by the Government.
His case seems to be that once an order or instrument is signed and authenticated by any of the officers figuring in Rule 12 of the J&K Government Business Rules, provisions of sub-clause (2) of Section 45 of the Constitution are attracted creating a bar against any inquiry into the validity of such an order.
He sought support for this from AIR 1973 P&H 426 and AIR 1968 SC 870.
7.
Mr. Sethi, learned Counsel for petitioner, on the other hand, concentrated on the circumstances surrounding the order signed by Mr. M Rahman and submitted that since it had not been communicated to any one, least of all the petitioner and did not bear any Government order number and also did not find any mention in the impugned signal of respondent No. 2, coupled with the fact that respondents had deliberately withheld the record, should leave no room for doubt that the order had not been in fact passed by the Govt. in accordance with the Business Rules.
He emphasised that these Rules lay down a specific procedure for passing an order of transfer of D.I.Gs of Police.
The matter falls under Second Schedule and Rule 14 requires it to be put up before the Cabinet after consideration of the Minister Incharge and under the present dispensation before the Administrative Council after consideration by the Adviser concerned.
He urged that failure to adhere to the procedure prescribed by the rules rendered the order non-existant and no amount of authentication by any designated officer could validate it.
8.
I would not have ventured into this virgin field, but for the blatant casualness displayed by respondents in defending their case.
They shifted their stand from time to time and dealt with the matter in a huff of sorts which is best illustrated by their intriguing stand taken about the petitioner's new place of posting.
While the impugned signal orders his posting as OSD, CID Srinagar the objections filed by respondents supported by an affidavit by no less as authority than the D.G.P.
himself shown that he stands transferred to the post of DIG CID Srinagar.
The same holds true about their conduct regarding production of record.
They volunteered to produce it in the first instance and then held it back for reasons best known to them.
9.
Be that as it may, all that requires to be considered and determined is whether the controversial order dated July 13, 1993 signed by Mr. M Rahman and expressed in the name of J&K Government can be held to be an order passed by the Government and whether this court is debarred from looking into it in the face of the challenge posed and the prohibition contained in clause (2) of Section 45 of the Constitution.
10.
This calls for a reference to the relevant provisions at the very outset :  State Constitution (Section 45): Article 45: Form of orders and instruments and their authentication -  (1) All executive actions of the Government shall be expressed to be taken in the name of the Governor or of the Government of Jammu and Kashmir.
(2) Orders and other instruments made and executed in the name of the Governor or of the Government of Jammu and Kashmir shall be authenticated in such manner as may be specified in the rules to be made by the Governor and the validity of an order or instrument which is so authenticated shall not be called in question on the ground that it is not an order or instrument made or executed by the Governor or, as the case may be, by the Government of Jammu and Kashmir.''
The Jammu and Kashmir Govt. Business Rules: Rule 12:  ``Every order or instrument of the Government of the State shall be signed whether by the Chief Secretary, the Additional Chief Secretary, a Secretary, an Addl.
Secretary, a Joint Secretary, an Addl.
Joint Secretary, a Deputy Secretary or an Under Secretary to the Government or such other officer as may be specially empowered by the Government in that behalf and such signature shall be deemed to be the proper authentication of such order or instrument.''
Rule 14: ``(1) The cases specified in the second schedule to these rules shall be brought up before the Cabinet.
A memorandum shall be submitted in respect of such cases to the Cabinet after consideration by the Minister Incharge.
In important cases the memorandum shall be shown by the Secretary concerned to the Chief Secretary before transmission to the Cabinet Secretariat.
The memorandum may be returned under the authority of the Chief Secretary if it does not incorporate full details so as to enable a proper assessment of the case being made or if it is otherwise defective or deficient in any respect...'' 11.
Section 45 of the State Constitution, as would appear from its plain reading, does not deal with the process of making of or execution of a Govt. order or instrument and how these come into existence.
If anything, it deals with the mode and manner of expression and authentication of such order or instrument.
Sub-clause (1) only contemplates that all executive actions shall be expressed to be taken in the name of the Governor or of the Government of Jammu and Kashmir.
It does not say how the action should be taken and by whom and what process should be adopted for the purpose, though it mandates that once such action is taken, it shall be expressed to be taken in the name of the Governor or of the Govt. as the case may be.
Similarly, sub-clause (2) mandates that orders and instruments once made and executed in the name of Governor of J&K shall be authenticated in such manner as may be specified in the Rules to be made by the Governor and where they are so authenticated in accordance with such rules, their validity is unquestionable on the ground that these were not made or executed by the Governor or by the Government.
The expression ``orders and instruments made'' is quite significant and pre- supposes that an order of instrument should be previously made and executed before it is authenticated in the manner prescribed under rules.
Where the order is not made by the Governor/Govt.
or by its appropriate authority there is no question of its authentication and no amount of authentication can validate such a non-existent order or instrument which patently suffers from what of jurisdiction or comes into being in contravention of the rules.
12.
After all authentication is only a means and not an end by itself.
It is an act to cause an instrument or order to be known and identified and is in the nature of confirmation and correctness of its contents.
It is not a substitute for making of an order or execution of an instrument.
13.
Therefore, I have no doubt in my mind that there is a basis and crucial difference between making of an order and its authentication.
The making indeed precedes its authentication and where the rules prescribe any process for such making there is no choice, but to adhere to such rules and an order which does not come into being in accordance with the rules, is no order in the eye of law.
In other words, the making of an order or the execution of an instrument by the Governor/Government is a sine qua non.
It has to be expressed in the name of the Governor/Govt.
and its authentication is the next requirement at a second stage which is a mode of giving an authenticity to such order or instrument already made.
And once it is authenticated in the manner prescribed under rules then it cannot be questioned on the ground that it had not been passed by the Governor/Govt.
Therefore, what becomes unchallengable is the existing order/instrument authenticated under rules.
In fact that is the true import of the constitutional prohibition contained in Section 45 of the Constitution.
In a case where the very existence of an order or instrument is under cloud, it can't be sheltered and saved on the ground of authentication alone and acceptance of any such view would create administrative choas and lead to disasterous consequence.
Imagine the implications of a case where the Officer designated to authenticate signs an order which is not founded on the decision of the Govt. and is considered final and beyond challenge.
Even the Govt. would be confronted by a fair accomplice in such a case and would have no way to check the resultant administrative anarchy with designated Officers feeling free to sign on orders by passing the decision making process of the Government.
It is in such a situation that it becomes necessary for the courts to step in and the constitutional prohibition contained in Section 45 does not debar them from going behind an order, the very existence of which is under challenge.
14.
It is true that there is a strong presumption of regularity attached to official acts and added to that is the prohibition contained in sub-clause (2) of Section 45.
But all that does not dispense with the requirement to show the actual existence of the order.
A defect in the form of the order is curable by its authentication under rules.
But where the very existence of an order is in doubt a burden is certainly thrown on the Govt. to show that the order was in fact passed by it in accordance with rules.
I am fortified in this by a number of decisions of Supreme Court and I have not come across any judgment which has held to the contrary.
It would be useless to quote from these judgments in the light of the consistency of view held by the Courts right from AIR 1952 SC 317 and upto AIR 1980 SC 383.
The Apex Court had the occasion to interpret the analogous provisions of Article 166 of the Indian Constitution.
In AIR 1952 SC 317, AIR 1959 SC 65, AIR 1961 SC 22, AIR 1963 SC 1223, AIR 1964 SC 1023, AIR 1967 SC 1145 and 1815 and AIR 1970 SC 1102 and in all these decisions it has brought out the distinction between the making of an order and its authentication and held that where the very existence of an order is under challenge, the courts can go behind the order after lifting the cloak of authentication to find out whether the order has been in fact passed by the Government.
It is also settled that the provisions of Article 166 corresponding to Section 45 of the State Constitution and directory in character and in case an order is found to be defective in form, it is not vitiated on that count and where it is shown on evidence or some proof that the order was passed by an appropriate authority, its authentication under rules by the designated Officer creates a bar to challenge its validity on the ground that it was not signed by a particular authority and was not consequently made or executed by the Govt.
The decisions relied upon by Mr. Gandhi (AIR 1973 P&H 426, AIR 1968 SC 870) are distinguishable on facts and in any case do not uphold any contrary view.
15.
Applying all this to the present case, it is a common ground that Mr. Rehman, Addl.
Chief Secretary (Home) is not the appropriate authority to pass the order transferring petitioner to Srinagar.
Under second Schedule read with Rule 14 of the J&K Business Rules made by the Governor in exercise of power under Section 45 such an order had to be brought up before the Cabinet (Administrative Council) on a memorandum after consideration by the Minister Incharge (Advisor).
It is not respondent's case that petitioner's transfer proposal was either referred to or dealt with by the Advisor or the Administrative Council.
Nor is any such thing borne by any record before me.
Considering the fact that respondents have wilfully and deliberately withheld the record leading to passing of the order signed by Mr. Rahman only strengthens the suspicion that the matter was neither referred to the Advisor and least of all but before the Administrative Council and proceeding on that premise, it becomes easy to hold that the Government had not passed any order transferring petitioner to Srinagar and the order signed by Mr. Rahman can't be clothed with the status of a Govt. order.
16.
Mr. Gandhi's submission that since order was signed by Addl.
Chief Secretary (Home), a designated officer to authenticate all Govt. orders under Rule 12 of the J&K Business Rules, it should be treated to be an order passed by the Government and that the court should refrain from looking into in the face of the bar created by sub-clause (2) of Section 45, is fallacious and must fall to the ground in the context of legal position enunciated hereinabove.
17.
Considering all this, I feel no hesitation in holding that the Govt. had not passed any order transferring the petitioner and the order produced by Mr. Gandhi, AAG, and signed by Mr. Rahman [ACS (Home)] is no substitute for an order of the Govt. Mr. Rahman undoubtedly is the appropriate authority to authenticate an order of the Govt. but he can't surely proclaim himself to be the Government.
18.
The net result is that the order transferring petitioner to Srinagar is quashed by this court alone.
This shall, however, leave respondents free to pass appropriate orders transferring the petitioner to any post in the exigency of administration.
19.
Consequently, I do not deem it necessary to examine the allegations of mala fides levelled by the petitioner.
It would be futile to do so in the circumstances.
Before parting, however, I deem it appropriate to point out the respondent's conduct in handling this case left much to be desired.
Their deliberate withholding of record has only defeated their cause.
It serves no purpose to bypass the courts.
It only leaves behind a bad impression and a bad taste.
This court has been loath to interfere in transfers of employees and more so of police officers who are duty bound to respond to the call of the duty wherever required.
It is a sad commentary on the Force that its officers should resist transfer on the ground of fear of militancy as in the present case.
But that does not obviate the necessity to pass orders through appropriate authority in accordance with rules.
This court has always struck at arbitrariness and would do so in the discharge of its constitutional obligation.
20.
This petition is accordingly allowed.