TS Doabia, J - The grievance of the petitioner in this petition is that he is being denied the benefit the concept of equal pay for equal work.
He is invoking Articles 14, 16 and 39(d) of the Constitution of India.
2.
The brief facts, as pleaded by the petitioner, are as under :  According to the petitioner, he is an employee of the Zila Sahkari Bhumi Vikas Bank Maryadit, Gwalior.
According to him, this is a statutory body constituted under the M.P. Co-operative Societies Act, 1960 (hereinafter referred to as the Act), The petitioner states that he was initially appointed as a Process Server on 20th of April, 1981.
He pleads that he possesses the requisite qualifications of a clerk.
He was appointed as such vide order No. 600 dated 22nd of September, 1981.
The petitioner contends that he was appointed against a post which was duly sanctioned.
His grievance is that he is being paid a consolidated salary instead of regular grade.
According to him, other lower division clerks are being given a regular grade but the Bank has adopted a discriminatory attitude against him.
3.
The stand of the respondent employer may now be considered.
It is admitted that the petitioner was initially appointed as a Process Server.
It is also admitted that he was appointed as a clerk but this is said to be a temporary appointment on daily wages.
According to the Bank, the petitioner was appointed on contingency basis.
It is admitted that a cut is being made from the salary of the petitioner towards provident fund subscription but it is stated that this does not change the status of the petitioner.
It is further admitted that all temporary employees were given permanent status but this was denied to the petitioner because a complaint was made against the petitioner by one lady.
According to the respondent-bank, it is stated that the petitioner had received some illegal gratification from the aforementioned lady.
It is the further case of the bank that a show cause notice was issued to the petitioner and it was found that the petitioner was guilty of having received some illegal gratification.
According to the Bank, this is the reason for not giving regular appointment.
It is further pleaded that the petitioner could have approached the authorities u/s 55 of the M.P. Co-operative Societies Act, 1960.
In a nut-shell, the stand of the respondent No. 1 is that the petitioner was not regularised because of his misconduct which was held to be proved that is he had asked for and had received some illegal-gratification from one lady by the name of Smt. Nebo.
4.
The petitioner has filed a rejoinder.
According to him, the complainant Smt. Nebo had withdrawn her complaint and for this reliance is being placed on Annexure P/13.
5.
The stand of the Bank that the petitioner is not entitled to regularisation cannot be sustained.
Even if it be presumed that there was some complaint and in that some finding was recorded regarding the petitioner having asked for illegal gratification, then this cannot be made a ground to penalise the petitioner for all times to come.
Apart from this, a mere show cause notice was issued to the petitioner.
A reply was submitted.
There is no final order passed by the respondent-bank taking a decision one way or the other.
The petitioner submitted his reply on 21st of June, 1983.
Smt. Nebo has withdrawn her complaint on 6th of October, 1983.
It is precisely for this reason that no final order has been passed and the return in this case was filed without annexing any final decision.
Had any final order been passed, the respondent-bank would have placed the same on the record of this case.
In the absence of any final order, there is nothing to prevent the respondent-bank from regularising the petitioner, more so, when other similar employees have been regularised.
6.
Under what circumstances an employee is entitled to regularisation was considered by this Court in the case of Amresh Kumar v. The Dean, Lakshmibai National College of Physical Education, Gwalior and another, 1995(1) S.C.T.
92, Writ Petition No. 1187 of 1988 and it was held that where an employee who is performing same or similar functions, then concept of equal pay for equal work would be attracted.
7.
In Randhir Singh v. Union of India, AIR 1982 SC 879 and later in Dhirendra Chameli v. State of UP, (1986)1 SCC 637, Surinder Singh v. Engineer-in-Chief, CPWD, AIR 1986 SC 584, Bhagwan Dass v. State of Haryana, AIR 1987 SC 2049, Jaipal v. State of Haryana, AIR 1988 SC 1504 and P Savita v. Union of India, AIR 1985 SC 1124, the Supreme Court implemented the principle of 'equal pay for equal work'.
The Court granted relief on the principle of equal pay on the basis of same or similar work performed by two class of employees under the same employer even though the two class of employees did not constitute the same service.
In all the aforesaid cases relief was granted only after it we was found that discrimination was practised in giving different scales of pay in violation of the equality clause enshrined under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
8.
In view of the above decisions one can say that where two class of employees perform identical or similar duties and carry out the same functions with the same measure of responsibility having same academic qualifications, they would be entitled to equal pay.
If the State denies them equality in pay, its action would be violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution, and the Court will strike down the discrimination and grant relief to the aggrieved employees but before such relief is granted the Court must consider and analyse the rationale behind the State action in prescribing two different scales of pay.
If on an analysis of the relevant posts, the Court finds that the classification made by the State in giving different treatment to the two class of employees is founded on rational basis having nexus with the objects sought to be achieved, the classification must be upheld.
Principle of equal pay for equal work is applicable among equals, it cannot be applied to unequals.
Relief to an aggrieved person seeking to enforce the principles of equal pay for equal work can be granted only after it is demonstrated before the Court that invidious discrimination is practised by the State in prescribing two different scales for the two class of employees without there being any reasonable classification for the same.
If the aggrieved employee fail to demonstrate discrimination, the principle of equal pay for equal work cannot be enforced by Court in abstract.
The question what scale should be provided to a particular class of service must be left to the Executive and only when discrimination is practised amongst the equals, the Court should intervene to undo the wrong and to ensure equality among the similarly placed employees.
The Court, however, cannot prescribe equal scales of pay for different class of employees.
9.
The above principles are equally attracted to the facts of the case.
The petitioner is doing the work of an LDC and as such he is entitled to the same grade in which other employees are kept.
10.
The petitioner would thus be entitled to the benefits of the concept of equal pay for equal work with effect from the date he filed the present petition in this case.
The petition was filed in the month of April, 1986.
Thus, the respondents would grant him the benefit of the grade of LDC with effect from 1st of May, 1986.
This petition is allowed in the manner indicated above.
Security, if deposited, be refunded to the petitioner.
Petition allowed.