TS Doabia, J - JC Mills Ltd, Birlanagar has challenged the order passed by the Industrial Court, whereby respondent No. 1 was ordered to be reinstated.
A further direction has been given that back wages be paid with effect from 6th August, 1984.
Back wages earlier to this period have not allowed as the plea of retrenchment was taken during the pendency of the proceedings.
2.
Brief facts which has led to the filing of this petition be noticed.
3.
Respondent No. 1 preferred an application before the Labour Court, Gwalior.
This application was preferred under Sections 31(3), 61 and 62 of the MP Industrial Relations Act on 28th August, 1980.
It was recited therein that the petitioner was in the employment of the Mill with effect from 1970 in Drawing Khata Shift.
He was working against the post of "Reacher".
The respondent No. 1 took a plea that he had gone to Agra on 7th November, 1979.
He fall ill and was absent up to 19th November, 1979.
He applied for leave.
He wanted to rejoin.
The petitioner was, however, not allowed to resume his duties.
On the basis of the plea of abandonment of service, services of respondent No. 1 were brought to an end.
4.
The Labour Court dismissed the application on 27th June, 1983.
The copy of the order so passed has been placed on record as Annexure P-7.
The Labour Court found that the petitioner failed to prove that he was really ill from 7th of November, 1979 to 19th November, 1979.
His absence was treated as unauthorised and his application was dismissed.
Respondent No. 1 preferred an appeal before the Industrial Court.
In the Industrial Court plea was taken for first time that as respondent No. 1 had worked for more than 240 days and provision of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act would be attracted.
As retrenchment compensation was not paid, the order of termination was held to be bad.
Some of the decisions taken note of by the Industrial Court and which still hold the field are as under :  1.
State Bank of India v. Sundarampney; (A.I.R. 1976 SC page 1111).
2.
Hindustan Steel Ltd v. The Presiding Officer, (A.I.R. 1977 SC Page 31).
3.
Santosh Gupta v. State Bank of Patiala, (A.I.R. 1980 SC Page 1219).
4.
Delhi Cloth and General Mills Ltd v. Shambhunath Mukherjee, (A.I.R. 1978 SC Page 8).
5.
Mohanlal v Management of M/s Bharat Electronics, (A.I.R. 1981 SC Page 1253).
6.
L Robert D'sourza v. Executive Engineer, Southern Railway, (A.I.R. 1982 SC Page 864).
The above view has been reiterated in the later decision of Supreme Court reported in Punjab Land Development and Reclamation Corporation Ltd, Chandigarh v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Chandigarh and Others, (1990)3 SCC 682 and a Division Bench decision of this Court in All India Trade Union of Food Corporation Employees and Workers v. Food Corporation of India, 1994(1) MPJR 129.
5.
In this petition argument has been raised on the basis of certain provisions contained in Clause 8(e) of the Standing Orders.
This reads as under :-  "An employee remaining absent beyond the period of leave originally granted to subsequently extended shall be liable to lose his lien on his post and shall be deemed to have left the service from the date of his unauthorised absence unless he returns within ten days of the expiry of the sanctioned leave and or explains to the satisfaction him, his inability to resume immediately on the expiry his of his leave.
An employee who so loses but reports for duty within 30 days of the expiry of his leave shall be kept as a Badli if he so desires and his name shall be entered in the Badli register."
It is on the basis of the above Standing Order argument has been raised that the services of the respondent No. 1 came to an end automatically and therefore the order passed by the Industrial Court cannot be sustained.
6.
The concept of automatic termination of service on account of over stay was considered by the Supreme Court in the case of Jai Shankar v. State of Rajasthan, (A.I.R. 1966 SC 492).
Service Regulations provided that in case an employee over-stayed his leave, then the concerned employee would be deemed to have sacrificed his service.
Relevant Regulation which was considered by the Supreme Court was as under :  "13.
An individual who absents himself without permission or who remains absent without permission for one month or longer after the end of his leave, should be considered to have sacrificed his appointment and may only be reinstated with the sanction of the competent authority.
Note :- The submission of an application for extension of leave already granted does not entitle an individual to absent himself without permission."
The argument of the State of Rajasthan that relationship of master and servant stood snapped in view of the aforementioned provisions was negatived.
The observations made by the Supreme Court, in this regard may be noticed :  "The regulation, no doubt, speaks of reinstatement but it really comes to this that a person would not be reinstated if he is ordered to be discharged or removed from service.
The question of reinstatement can only be considered if it is first considered discharged from service.
Whichever way one looks at the matter, the order of the Government involves a termination of the service.
The Regulation involves a punishment for overstaying one's leave and the burden is thrown on the incumbent to secure reinstatement by showing cause.
It is true that the Government may visit to punishment of discharge or removal from service on a person who has absented himself by over staying his leave, but we do not think that Government can order a person to be discharged from service without at least telling him that they propose to remove him and giving him an opportunity of showing cause why he should not be removed.
If this is done the incumbent will be entitled to move against the punishment for, if his plea succeeds, he will not be removed and no question of reinstatement will arise.
It may be convenient to describe him as seeking reinstatement but this is not tantamount to saying that because the person will only be reinstated by an appropriate authority, that the removal is automatic and outside the protection of Article 311.
A removal is removal and if it is punishment for overstaying one's leave an opportunity must be given to the person against whom such an order is proposed, no matter how the Regulation describes it.
To give no opportunity is to go against Article 211 and this is what has happened here."
After making the aforementioned observation, it was observed that the concerned employee was entitled to an opportunity to show cause against the proposed removal from service on the ground that he had overstayed his leave.
The above judgment of the Supreme Court was considered by a Division Bench of this Court in All India Trade Union of Food Corporation Employees and Workers v. Food Corporation of India, 1994(1) MPRJ 129, the decision given in Deokinandan Prasad v. State of Bihar, AIR 1971 SC 1409 and D Gupta v. State of Bihar, AIR 1973 Patna 431 was referred to.
After noticing the aforementioned decisions, the Division Bench observed as under :  "7.
Learned counsel appearing for the employer, supports its action and states in reply that the termination of services on the ground of abandonment does not amount to 'retrenchment' within the meaning of Section 2(oo) of the ID Act.
Alternatively it is submitted that there is nothing on record to show that the employee had completed one year's 'continuous service' with within definition of 'continuous service' under Section 25-B of the ID Act.
The argument is that for the aforesaid reason, the employee cannot get benefit of the provisions of Section 25-F of the ID Act.
Supporting the impugned action on the basis of the Circular (Annexure Z-1), the submission on behalf of the employer, is that deemed abandonment of service is a subject matter staff regulations.
Hence he can be governed by the departmental instructions contained in the circular.
8.
Having given out thoughtful consideration to the submission of the parties we find that the contentions advanced on behalf of the employee deserve to be accepted and his termination is liable to be set aside.
The service conditions of the employees of the Corporation are regulated by statutory regulations.
Regulation 32-A enumerates several categories of misconduct which under sub-regulation (7) includes 'absence without leave' regulation 32-A (7) is reproduced under :-  "32 Misconduct Without prejudice to the generality of the term 'Misconduct' the following acts or omission and commission shall be treated as misconduct :-  (1) ... ... .. .." It is further observed in para 10 :  "Learned counsel for the employee is also right in submitting that striking off the name of the employee from the rolls on the alleged ground of abandonment of service amounts to his 'retrenchment' which is ab initio void for non-compliance of the provisions of Section 25-F read with Section 2(oo) of the ID Act.
The same view was expressed by this Court in Nagar Palika Parishad Lahar v. Ram Naresh Rajoriya, (1994)4 Service Cases Today 261.
Thus there is no merit in the argument of the employer petitioner.
To be fair to the learned counsel for the petitioner the decisions referred by me may be noticed.
These are : Burn & Co v. Their Employees, AIR 1957 SC 38, M/s. Indian Iron and Steel Co Ltd v. Their Workmen, (AIR 1968 SC 33).
However, in view of the law laid down by the Supreme Court in Jai Shankar v. State of Rajasthan, (AIR 1966 SC 492) and the decisions on which reliance was placed by the Industrial Court and in view of the law laid down by a Division Bench of this Court in All India Trade Corporation Employees and Workers v. Food Corporation of India, 1994(1) MPJR 129, there is no merit in the contentions raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner-Mill.
This petition is dismissed with petitioner costs.
Costs Rs. 500/-.
Petition dismissed.