VK Bali, J - The petitioner M/s. Haryana Handloom Weavers Apex Co-operative Society Limited through its Managing Director takes strong exception to award Annexure P-1, dated 12th April, 1990, rendered by Labour Court, Ambala, vide which respondent-workman Hakam Sain, has been reinstated that continuity of service and backwages.
The obvious prayer of the petitioner is to quash order Annexure P-1.
2.
The facts of the case reveal that in the year 1979 due to heavy recurring losses 14 centres of the petitioner-society were closed and as a result thereof various employees were retrenched.
Respondent-workman was also one of those who was retrenched along with other employees on account of closure of centres.
He was asked to quite vide order dated 1st September, 1979, after fully complying with all the mandatory provisions as envisaged under section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act.
However, after re-organisation, some sick centres were revived and as a result thereof the services of a Weaving master were required.
Keeping in view the provisions contained in Section 25-H of the Industrial Disputes Act Pala Ram employee of the petitioner-society visited the house of the workman on 16.5.1982 and 17.5.1982 to give him notice regarding the vacancy and to offer him re-employment.
On both the dates Pala Ram could not find workman at home, but was able to contact the wife of the workman who was told to inform him that he could present himself on the date for interview.
Not only that, on 7th May, 1982, an advertisement for various posts was also inserted in the Indian Express a daily newspaper with wide circulation, which had a note appended thereto that retrenched employees would be given preference over others.
When despite oral information as also through the newspapers the workman evinced no interest in the matter one Shri Leela Krishan was appointed on the post of Weaving Master.
More than two years thereafter, the workman served a demand notice to the management which did not yield any result thus, necessitating reference which was made by Government to Labour Court for judication of the dispute between the parties to the litigation.
Even though there was no dispute with regard to retrenchment of the workman on account of the closure of the petitioner's centres, yet the only issue framed by the Labour Court was whether the termination of the services of the petitioner were in order or not and if so to what relief he was entitled to.
Inasmuch as, during the pendency of the dispute before the Labour Court, there was compromise between the parties, which was obviously resiled by the workman, the Labour Court had to frame another issue with regard to his being estopped from proceeding with the reference for the reason that he had settled the dispute with the management.
The findings on both the issues were turned against the petitioner-society culminating into the award Annexure P-1, as referred to above, which has been challenged in this writ petition.
3.
Before the matter is proceeded any further, it requires to be mentioned that when the matter came up for motion hearing on November 20, 1990, counsel representing the petitioner-Society stated that the Management was all the time keen to offer employment to respondent-workman but it is the workman who did not turn up.
It was further stated that even today the management was willing to take back respondent-workman in employment.
It is after noticing the aforesaid submissions of the learned counsel that notice of motion was issued for December 21, 1990.
The matter, however, came up for admission purposes on March 21, 1991 when writ was admitted and operation of Award, Annexure P-1, was stayed.
Mr. Mutneja, learned counsel for the petitioner, has once again reiterated the stand of petitioner-society that the workman shall be taken back in service if he offers himself for employment.
On merits, learned counsel, contends that the facts and circumstances of the present case clearly point towards bona fide of petitioner-Management in re-employing respondent-workman in compliance with the provision of Section 25-H of the Industrial Disputes Act and if the pleadings of the parties were considered in proper perspective, the only issue that should have been framed by the Labour Court was to be with regard to the bona fide of the management in offering re-employment to the workman.
It is further contended that the said issue in view of the pleadings and evidence available on records ought to have been returned in favour of petitioner-Management.
It is further the case of petitioner that workman who had undertaken to withdraw all court cases including the present one in case bonus of earlier years was paid to him, could not possibly continue with the present case before the Labour Court as the settlement arrived at between the parties was binding upon the workman and he was also estopped by his act and conduct to agitate the matter.
4.
The cause of petitioner has been opposed and in the written statement that has been filed on behalf of respondent-workman, it has been pleaded that petitioner had not taken respondent into its employment though persons junior to him, namely, Nathu Ram and Leela Krishan, were reemployed in 1980 and 1982 respectively.
No notice of interview held on May 22, 1982 in accordance with Rule 77 of the Industrial Disputes Rules, Punjab, 1958 was given to him.
No written letter of the proposed interview was delivered to him as well.
Insofar as publication of news of interview in the Indian Express is concerned, it is pleaded that the same is a farce as respondent would not know any other language but for Urdu.
The other pleas of petitioner, as noticed above, have also been controverted.
5.
After hearing learned counsel for the petitioner and going through the records of the case, this Court is of the considered view that respondent- workman deserve no other relief but for re-employment and that too in view of the offer made by petitioner during the currency of the reference as also pending disposal of this writ petition.
The Labour Court completely lost sight of material facts and circumstances of the present case which had a great bearing for deciding the controversy in issue.
The Labour Court rather chose to decide the matter by simply observing that the Management could not show anything in writing intimating the offer of re-employment to the workman.
It may be true that if there was a writing available and the same was produced on records, the same would have clinched the matter but in the absence of writing, conclusion could not be drawn that no offer of re-employment was made to the workman and, therefore, the evidence that was led by the parties ought to have been taken into consideration.
The intrinsic facts of the case, like, workman was retrenched on September 1, 1979 and the persons other than the workman were re-employed or employed in pursuance of the advertisement, referred to above, on May 22, 1982 as also that the workman had issued demand notice for the first time on October 23, 1984 ie after more than two years when others were re-employed, were not noticed by the Labour Court.
Coupled with the aforesaid facts, if the settlement arrived at between the parties, Annexure P-3, was to be considered, an irresistible conclusion would have been drawn that the workman all through i.e. after his retrenchment was somewhere employed and was not interested in employment but for the bonus for the years 1977-78, 1978-79 and 1979-80.
A further irresistible conclusion ought to have been drawn that it is only with a view to get backwages which would run into several thousands of rupees, that, as an after-thought, he pressed on with the case before the Labour Court and took it to its final end.
There is no explanation coming on the records of the case as to why the workman issued demand notice to the Management on October 23, 1984 ie more than two years after others were re-employed.
The stand of the Management has been clear from the very beginning.
It wanted to re-employ the workman.
However, when the settlement was arrived at between the parties, bonus for the years referred to above, was paid.
In spite of that, Management stood to its ground by offering re-employment to the workman all this while i.e. when the case was pending in this Court from 1990 till date.
In the light of these circumstances if the evidence had been considered, there would have been no difficulty in returning a finding that not only Pala Ram, an employee of the petitioner-Management had actually contacted respondent-workman and his wife telling him to rejoin his duties but even when others were being employed it had been clearly mentioned in the advertisement that those who had been retrenched earlier would have precedence in employment.
Coupled with this, it is a stark fact that workman was not retrenched on account of any mala fide intention on the part of the petitioner-Management as it is admitted position between the parties that due to heavy recurring losses, 14 Centres of petitioner-Society were closed down necessarily resulting into retrenchment of some employees.
The evidence led by the Management could not be rebutted on the basis of solitary statement of workman himself who, as referred to above, in considered view of this Court, wanted to get backwages without having worked for years together.
6.
Finding substantial merit in the contentions raised by learned counsel for the petitioner, I allow this writ and set aside the order, Annexure P-1, passed by the Labour Court.
However, if the workman is still willing to join, the Management would permit him to so join on the service conditions that may be in existence as on today with regard to the post that the workman was holding prior to his retrenchment.
Parties shall, however, bear their own costs.
Petitioner allowed.