SK Keshote, J - The petitioner by means of this writ petition has prayed for issue of a writ, order or direction in the nature of mandamus to the respondents not to fill up the post of Psychologist in the Bureau of Psychology/Regional Psychological Centres in the State of UP by promotion without appointing the petitioner on one of such posts on the basis of her selection by the UP Public Service Commission.
She has further prayed that a mandamus may be issued to the respondents to appoint the petitioner and pay the salary admissible on the post of Psychologist in the Bureau of Psychology/Regional Psychological Centres.
2.
The petitioner has further prayed for issuing a declaratory mandamus to the respondents to treat the petitioner as having been appointed on the post of Psychologist from the date the two other persons, namely Sri Upendra Kumar and Sri Indra Pal, have been allowed to join the posts of Psychologist.
A further prayer has been made by the petitioner regarding the payment of arrears of salary etc. with effect from the date Sri Upendra Kumar and Sri Indra Pal have been allowed to join and till the date of joining of the petitioner.
3.
Briefly stated, the facts of the case are that the UP State Govt. prior to the year 1957 established a Bureau of Psychology.
UP, Allahabad and the same is stated to be exclusively owned, controlled and managed by the State Govt.
In para 3 of the writ petition it has been stated that there are 14 posts of Psychologist in the Bureau of Psychology (Allahabad) and in Psychological Centres.
The break up of the posts have been given as 3 posts of Psychologist in the Bureau of Psychology (Allahabad) and 11 posts in Psychological Centres.
As per the case of the petitioner, the posts of Psychologist are within the purview of the UP Public Service Commission and the appointments on the said posts can be made only with concurrence of the Commission.
As per pleadings of the parties, the posts of Psychologist in the Bureau of Psychology (Allahabad) and at Regional Psychological Centres, are to be filled up 50% by promotion and 50% by direct recruitment through selection to be held by the Public Service Commission.
4.
By an advertisement No. 11/83-84 by the Public Service Commission, UP, which was published in the daily newspapers on 721984, the applications were invited for two posts of Psychologist in the Bureau of Psychology.
In response to the aforesaid advertisement, the petitioner alongwith others, submitted application to the Public Service Commission.
The petitioner was called for interview.
On the basis of the recommendations of the Public Service Commission Sarva Sri Upendra Kumar and Indra Pal were given appointment on the posts of Psychologist.
5.
The petitioner has averred in the writ petition that her name has been recommended by the Commission in the waiting list.
It has further been stated in the writ petition that her name has also been forwarded to the Govt. by the Commission as a reserved candidate.
In paragraph 13 of the writ it has been averred that out of 14 posts, till 1986 6 posts were filled up by direct recruitment, whereas 8 posts were filled up by promotion on ad hoc basis and as such one post was illegally filled up by promotion.
It is further case of the petitioner that all the promotions have been made on ad hoc basis.
6.
The grievance of the petitioner is that being an approved candidate she was entitled to be appointed on one post of Psychologist, which has to be filled up by direct recruitment.
In paragraph 15 of the writ petition the petitioner has made a grievance that retention of the persons on the posts of Psychologist over the above the promotional quota and that too by the persons who have been found unfit and rejected by the Commission is unjustified.
In paragraph 20 of the writ petition the petitioner has stated that she apprehended that the posts which were likely to fall vacant in future shall be filled up by making an illegal and arbitrary appointment in ignorance of the quota of direct recruitment and her claim by the respondents, hence she filed Civil Misc.
Writ Petition No. 13673 of 1986, Smt. Mamta Mittal v. State of UP and others before this court.
The writ petition aforesaid filed by the petitioner was decided and dismissed by this court vide its order dated 291987.
A copy of the order which has been passed by this court in the said earlier writ petition of the petitioner has been filed as Annexure-VIII to the present writ petition.
7.
After the decision of the writ petition aforesaid, the petitioner sent a letter dated 20121987 to the Secretary, Department of Education, Govt. of UP, Lucknow, in which she prayed for giving her appointment in view of the order passed by this court in the said earlier writ petition.
8.
The petitioner has come up with the case that Km.
Aruna Kakkar, who was holding the post of Psychologist, has been promoted in the year 1980 the next higher post and, therefore, the petitioner be given appointment on ad hoc basis against the said vacant post on account of promotion of Km.
Aruna Kakkar.
The petitioner has further stated in the writ petition that she sent reminders to the Govt. on 961988, 9.7.1988 and 2571989.
Despite submitting the representations and reminders it is alleged that she has neither been furnished a copy of the order deciding her representation, nor any decision by the respondents has been communicated together on the representation.
The petitioner has made grievance in para 32 of the writ petition that she has reasons to believe that the persons having their vested interest both in the Bureau of Psychology at Allahabad and the persons in the office of the respondents have kept the file in a cold storage in order to deprive her legal rights and claim on the post of Psychologist.
In para 33 of the writ petition the petitioner has stated that in the month of July 1989, Kin.
Aruna Kakkar has been dismissed from the service and as many as four posts of direct recruitment quota out of total 14 posts of Psychologist in the State are lying vacant on permanent basis and no recommendation or requisition has been sent by the respondents to the Public Service Commission to fill up those posts by selection.
The petitioner has further stated that the select list containing her name still survives and is in force.
9.
With these facts the petitioner has filed the present writ petition wherein she has prayed for a writ of mandamus to the respondents to appoint her on the subsequent posts of Psychologist in the Bureau of Psychology at Allahabad which was previously held by Miss Urmila Kakkar, who was appointed on ad hoc basis, due to the promotion of Km.
Aruna Kakkar on the higher post in 1980 and subsequently due to her dismissal in July, 1989.
As stated earlier, other reliefs have also been claimed by the petitioner in the writ petition.
10.
This court on 5.4.1991 passed an order under which the Secretary concerned was directed to dispose of the petitioner's representation on or before 26.4.1991 by a reasoned order and a copy of which was ordered to be supplied to her.
11.
A counter-affidavit has been filed on behalf of the respondents Nos. 1 to 4.
The respondent No. 1 has come up with the case in defence that after affording an opportunity of hearing the Govt. has passed the order dated 1321991 on the representation of the petitioner and the same has been communicated to her.
It has further been mentioned that no ad hoc vacancy in the cadre of Psychologist occurred since 1984, nor any such appointment has been made since the said year under the direct recruitment quota.
The respondents have averred that Km.
Aruna Kakkar was selected to the post of Psychologist by the Commission in the year 1980 against the vacancy advertised by the Commission in the year 1978 and that Km.
Aruna Kakkar has been promoted in the next higher post but she is having a lien on the post of Psychologist.
It has been further stated that the dispute does not relate to the vacancy prior to 1985 and as such the controversy involved in this case can have nothing to do with the appointment of Dr. Aruna Kakkar on higher post by promotion on ad hoc basis.
Two posts have been advertised in the year 1983-84 and Sri Upendra Kumar and Sri Indra Pal have been appointed and they are still working on the posts.
12.
Reply to the counter-affidavit has been filed by the petitioner.
So far as the facts are concerned that no ad hoc vacancy was available after 1984, nor any ad hoc appointment has been made since the said year has not been controverted.
It has been admitted that Dr. Km.
Aruna Kakkar was appointed on the post of Psychologist Grade-I vide order dated 3121980 on ad hoc basis.
The petitioner has also admitted as a fact that Dr. Kumari Aruna Kakkar and Km.
Urmila Kakkar were simultaneously working on the posts of Psychologist.
The fact which has been stated in the counter-affidavit that Km.
Urmila Kakkar was promoted in Class-II and has taken over her charge on 2411977 in place of Km.
Dr. MK Agarwal has not been controverted by the petitioner.
Further supplementary counter-affidavit-I and supplementary court-affidavit-Il and the reply thereto by supplementary rejoinder-affidavits have been filed by the parties.
The petitioner has filed an application under Section 151, C.P.C. and Supplementary Affidavit-I in this case on 2381981.
In the application a prayer has been made that the accompanying supplementary affidavit-I be accepted and directed to be taken on record treating the same as part of the writ petition.
13.
By way of supplementary affidavit-I the petitioner has brought on record certain documents.
These documents are copies of her representations which were filed by her from time to time to the Govt. and certain correspondence with the Govt.
The petitioner filed another application on 25111991 under Section 151, C.P.C. along with supplementary affidavit-II on 1591993.
In the said application a prayer has been made that the accompanying supplementary affidavit-II be accepted and directed to be taken on record treating the same as part of the writ petition.
In the application filed alongwith supplementary affidavit-II, the petitioner has challenged the order which has been passed by the Govt. on her representation on 1391991.
14.
In the counter-affidavit filed by the respondents No. 1 to 4 it has been stated that Km.
Aruna Kakkar filed Civil Misc.
Writ Petition No. 20274 of 1989 before this Court against the order dated 1271989, under which she was dismissed from service.
In the said writ petition a stay has been granted to her by this Court on 951990 and the operation of the order dated 1271989 has been stayed until further orders.
In pursuance of the said stay order dated 951990 of this Court she was taken back in service.
15.
Learned counsel for the petitioner Sri AK Yog has argued that the post of Psychologist was vacant in the year 1980 and as such the petitioner should have been given appointment on ad hoc basis on the said post as her name has been there in the waiting list prepared by the Commission in the year 1984.
Next it has contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the representation filed by the petitioner has illegally been rejected.
She was not afforded an opportunity of hearing and the ground taken for the rejection of the said representation is arbitrary.
16.
Learned Standing Counsel on the other hand has argued that the petitioner has no right to claim any ad hoc appointment on the post of Psychologist which is stated to be a vacancy of 1980 as her name was not there in the waiting list of any of the selections made for the vacancies of 1978 to 1980.
Next, it has been argued by the standing counsel that the petitioner's name has been included in the waiting list which has been prepared by the Commission by making selection on two posts of psychologist in respect of which requisition has been sent in the year 1984.
The petitioner could have any legitimate claim for her appointment in case none of the selected candidates would have joined on the said posts or in case any ad hoc appointment would have been made after 1984.
The learned standing counsel has further argued that the petitioner has no legal right, much less a fundamental right to claim any ad hoc appointment.
It has further been argued by him that none of the legal or fundamental rights of the petitioner has been infringed, nor any mandamus could be issued against the Govt. to give the petitioner appointment on ad hoc basis only on the ground that her name was there in the waiting fist.
Lastly, learned standing counsel has argued that no selection whatsoever has admittedly been made against the vacancy of the year 1980 and as such in case this court directs the respondents to give her appointment to the petitioner on the said post it would be violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
17.
We have considered the rival contentions made by the counsel for both sides.
When the petitioner was not selected in the main list prepared by the Commission for the selection made in 1984.
The two candidates who have been selected have been given appointment on the posts and they have accordingly joined the posts and are continuing to work thereon till this date.
Without entering into the controversy as to whether the posts which fell vacant on account of promotion of Dr. Km.
Aruna Kakkar which could not be filled up as she was having her lien thereon, the petitioner has no legal right to be appointed to the said post because no requisition has been sent to fill up that post by the Govt. to the Commission.
In case the Govt. decided to keep one post vacant for the reason that another incumbent has her lien thereon, it cannot be said that the said action of the respondents is illegal or arbitrary or unjustified.
The petitioner has only the right of consideration and not a right of appointment.
So far as the selection on the two posts which has been made in 1984 is concerned, the petitioner could have been found placed in the waiting list and as the two persons who were admittedly appointed on the said two posts, the petitioner has no right whatsoever to claim her appointment on ad hoc basis on the basis that her name is in the waiting list against the vacancy of the year 1980.
18.
So far as the grievance of the petitioner that she was not given full opportunity of personal hearing by the Govt. before passing the order on her representation, it is suffice to say that from the counter-affidavit which has been filed it comes out that sufficient opportunity was given to her.
Apart from this court has directed to Govt. to decide the representation of the petitioner by passing a speaking order.
From a perusal of the order dated 13991 passed by the Govt. it comes out that it is a speaking order.
19.
Consequently, the relief sought by the petitioner in the writ petition cannot be granted under Article 226 of the Constitution as she has no legal right to get ad hoc appointment on a post of the year 1980 on the basis of the fact that she was kept in the waiting list which has been prepared by the Commission in the year 1984, more so, when the two posts for which selection has been made has already been filled up by the candidates whose names were there in the main list prepared by the Commission.
20.
The writ petition, therefore, fails and is dismissed.
No orders as to costs.
21.
The stay order granted in this case dated 1551992 is hereby vacated.
Petition dismissed.