TS Doabia, J - This is a petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India.
The petition has been preferred by the employer.
2.
The brief facts are as under :-  The petitioner company is engaged in the manufacture of various types of suiting material.
The respondent No. 1 (workman) was employed as a Front man on a machine in the Calendar Department.
It is stated that on 1st of August, 1977, the respondent No. 1 was on duty in he night shift.
It is alleged that he was negligent in discharging his duties.
As a result of his negligence, about 3000 meters of cloth was damaged.
The services of respondent No. 1 were terminated vide order Annexure P/1.
This was termed as a simple order of discharge.
A perusal of the order, however, gives reasons and it is stated that respondent No. 1 committed lapses while he was on duty.
The workman felt aggrieved against the order of discharge and moved the Labour Court.
In the Labour Court, an application was submitted by the management.
In this application, the management stated that petitioner would be taken back in service and this would, however, be subject to the final decision.
This application having been given, the respondent No. 1 was taken back in service on 4th of August, 1980.
3.
The Labour Court further proceeded with the merits of the controversy.
It came to the conclusion that order of discharge could not be passed without holding enquiry.
It also came to the conclusion that enquiry was a must.
Following the law laid down by the Supreme Court in Workmen of FT & R & Co v. The Management, AIR 1973 SC 1227 the management was permitted to prove its case in the Labour Court.
Evidence was led.
The Labour Court came to the conclusion that the case of the management did not fall within the definition of the term "major misconduct".
It accordingly gave its award in favour of the workman.
The Labour Court directed payment of wages from 1181987 to 481987.
The management felt aggrieved against the order so passed.
It preferred an appeal before the Industrial Court.
The Industrial Court found no reason to differ with the order passed by the Labour Court and concluded that the "misconduct" attributed to the workman did not fall within the punishment described as misconduct.
4.
The argument of the learned counsel appearing for the petitioners is that so far as the Standing Order applicable to the petitioner company is concerned, an act of negligence is also covered by major misconduct.
According to him as per the award given by the Industrial Court on 11th Feb., 1972 a further clause was added to the Standing Order No. 12.
This clause reads as under :  "(r) Habitual or gross negligence of work" - A perusal of this clause (r) shows that negligence on the part of the workman does fall within the definition of the term "misconduct".
In this view of the matter, the finding recorded by the Industrial Court as well as Labour Court is not based on proper appreciation of legal position.
In this view of the matter, the case has necessarily to be remanded to the Labour Court for deciding the same afresh in accordance with law.
The aforementioned clause (r) be taken into consideration.
The petition is allowed but with no order as to costs.
Security, if paid, shall be refunded to the petitioner.
Petition allowed.