TS Doabia, J - These are two petitions under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India.
These are WP No. 519 of 1985 (JC Mills Ltd, Birlanagar v. Mangilal and others, 1994(4) S.C.T.
736) and WP No. 892 of 1985 (Mangilal v. The Factory Manager J C Mills, Birlanagar and others).
One has been preferred by the Management and the other has been preferred by the workman.
2.
The facts as detailed in WP No. 519/85 be seen.
3.
The respondent No. 1 was working as a jobber with the petitioner-Mills.
On 2nd of October, 1977, the respondent No. 1 was on duty.
A workman who was on regular duty was absent.
A Badali workman had to be provided.
It is alleged that in the matter of providing the Badali workman the respondent No. 1 did-not adhere to the roaster prepared in this behalf.
When this happened the immediate supervisory officer, namely, Shri Sinha told respondent No. 1 that the course adopted by him was not proper as this would lead to labour unrest.
It was suggested that the workman who was entitled to be taken on Badali should be posted.
This suggestion infuriated the respondent No. 1.
It is stated that he not only used filthy abuses but also manhandled him.
The abuses which were hurled by the respondent No. 1 have been detailed in Annexure P/10, and are not fit to be reproduced here.
It is further stated that the workman was under the influence of alcohol.
4.
On the basis of the above incident an order of termination was passed, This is Annexure P/10.
This order was challenged in the Labour Court.
The Labour Court came to the conclusion that there should have been a proper enquiry and this was not such a matter where service of the respondent No. 1 could be brought to an end in a summary manner.
The Labour Court conducted inquiry and came to a conclusion that the workman was guilty of misconduct.
The Labour Court, however, granted benefit of backwages till the date it passed the order.
For this support was had from the decision given in Gujarat Steel Tubes Mazdoor Sangh's case, AIR 1980 SC 1896.
(sic) passed as the workman felt aggrieved.
They preferred separate appeals before the Industrial Court.
The Industrial Court upheld the order passed by the Labour Court.
It did come to the conclusion that the workman was guilty of misconduct and that he had misbehaved with Shri Sinha.
The Industrial Court however in addition to giving benefit of law laid down by the Supreme Court in Gujarat Steel Tubes (supra), held that the workman was also entitled to retrenchment compensation.
The claim of the workman seeking total exoneration was negatived.
Both sides have expressed dis-satisfaction with the order passed by Industrial Court.
This is how the two writ petitions have been filed in this Court.
5.
So far as the Writ petition preferred by the Management is concerned, it is restricted to challenging the grant of retrenchment compensation by the Industrial Court.
The contention of the learned counsel appearing for the Mill is that once a workman was found guilty of misconduct and was given benefit of the law laid down by the Supreme Court in Gujarat Steel Tubes (supra), he was not entitled to any further benefit.
He is right in his submission.
He has rightly placed reliance on the decision given by the Supreme Court in the case of Deshraj Gupta v. Industrial Tribunal, 1991(1) SCC 249 : AIR 1990 SC 2174 : 1991(1) S.C.T.
86.
6.
In view of the above position of law there is merit in the contention of the counsel for the Management that the grant of retrenchment compensation to the workman was not justified.
7.
So far as the writ petition filed by the workman is concerned it may be seen that his counsel wants interference to be made with the quantum of punishment.
This however is not permissible.
The Supreme Court way back in 1963 in the case of State of Andhra Pradesh and others v. Sree Rama Rao, AIR 1963 SC 1723, has held that this Court should not sit as a court of appeal.
This view has been consistently followed.
The recent decision is repeated as SBI v. Samarendra Kishore Endow, 1994(2) SCT 250(SC) : 1994 AIR SCW 1465.
8.
In view of position of law, there is no merit in the writ petition filed by the workman.
Accordingly, it is dismissed.
The writ petition filed by the Management is allowed to the extent that the workman would not be entitled to any retrenchment compensation.
Petition dismissed.