GS Singhvi, J - Petitioners MM Mehta, Mohinder Nath and Mukhtiar Singh, were candidates at the State Subordinate Accounts Services Examinations held in February, 1992.
The examination consisted of four papers of which Paper III was in Advanced Accountancy and was held on 2621992.
After undertaking examination along with other candidates the petitioners and some other candidates made representation Annexure P-6 to the Director, Treasury and Accounts, Chandigarh pointing out that question Nos. 7, 6 and 3 in Paper III and question Nos. 3, 4 and 6 in Paper IV were out of syllabus and for this reason they could not attempt/fairly attempt these questions and this has prejudicially affected their performance in the said examination.
They requested that re-examination be held in IIIrd and IVth papers.
Similar representation was made to the Financial Commissioner of Haryana and Joint Secretary to the Government of Haryana, Department of Finance.
Having not received any favourable answer from the respondents and having not succeeded at the examination, the petitioners filed this petition after serving demand notice on the respondents.
2.
Along with the Writ Petition, the petitioners have enclosed opinions given by Shri Ram Babu Aggarwal, Chartered Accountant and Shri SC Sharma, of the Department of Commerce, CRM Jat College, Hisar indicating the difference in the Cash Flow Statement and Fund Flow Statement and further that these are separate methods for controlling Cash and Funds utilized.
Petitioners' plea is that on account of questions having been asked beyond scope of the syllabus prescribed for the examination they were prevented from effectively answering the questions of which reference has been made herein above and precisely for this reason they have been declared as failed of the said examination.
Another plea of the petitioners is that they were not given reasonable opportunity to answer the questions inasmuch as out of seven questions in Paper III they were called upon to answer five questions of which question No. 1 was compulsory.
Likewise in Paper IV they were called upon to attempt five out of six questions of which 1 to 6 were compulsory and in this manner the standards set up for judging their performance at the examination were much more rigorous than the one which were set in the examination held in the previous years.
Petitioners have placed on record question papers of previous years to point out that the option given to the candidates who had appeared in the examination in the previous year was more wider than the one afforded to the petitioners.
Yet another plea which has been raised by one of the petitioners namely MM Mehta is that his result of the examination held in 1992 has not been declared whereas result of all other candidates has been announced.
3.
I may also make reference to statement made in the replication filed by the petitioners that one Ranbir Singh had been allowed 8 chances to pass the examination even though under Rules only six chances are permissible but similar facility has not been provided to the petitioners and in this manner they have been subjected to discrimination.
4.
Respondents in their joint reply asserted that none of the questions in S.A.S.
Part II examination held in February, 1992 was outside the scope of the syllabus.
They have pleaded that on receipt of the representations by the candidates a reference was made to the Examiner and after receipt of comments from the examiner it was decided that there was no substance in the grievance raised by the petitioners.
Respondents have pleaded that the petitioners were fully conscious and cognizance of the scope of the syllabus and the questions and only after having failed to secure pass marks they have raised grievance regarding questions being out of course or narrow scope of options to the candidates to answer the questions.
They have asserted that in the answer-books of some of the candidates irregularities were detected and for that enquiries were being held by the them.
5.
Before dealing with other contentions advanced by the learned counsel for the petitioners I may observe that none of the petitioners has succeeded at the S.A.S.
Part II examination held in 1992.
Under directions of the court learned Deputy Advocate-General has produced the details of the marks secured by each of the petitioners.
These details show that petitioner MM Mehta has secured 71 and 54-1/2 marks respectively in Papers III and IV, petitioner Mohinder Nath has secured 114 and 44 marks respectively in Papers III and IV, and petitioner-Mukhtiar Singh has secured 112 marks in paper III and 51 marks in Paper IV.
Since minimum pass marks in each paper were 60 and the petitioners have failed to secure these marks in paper IV, they should have treated them successful.
In addition it is necessary to observe that although result of the petitioner MM Mehta has not been declared.
Learned Deputy Advocate-General has given out that a detailed enquiry for the irregularity committed at the examination, is being held and as per directions given by this court in C.W.P.
No. 5127 of 1994.
Such enquiry is to be finalised by the end of August, 1994, and only thereafter formal result would be declared in respect of the remaining candidates including MM Mehta.
6.
Argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner that the candidates were denied fair opportunity to answer the questions in the examination held in 1992 deserves summary rejection.
No statutory provision has been brought to the notice of the court which enjoins upon the respondents to give a particular option of questions to the candidates to be attempted at the examination.
It is primarily left to the discretion of the authority holding examination and the paper setter to decide as to how many questions should be asked in a particular question paper and what options should be given to the candidates.
Maybe that at one time chances available to the candidates to answer questions were larger but if in the later year the examining authority and the paper setter have thought it proper to limit the option to few questions, decision taken by the respondents cannot be termed as arbitrary or irrational.
It is to be remembered that all candidates who appeared in the examination were required to answer same set of questions and if a large number of them have not felt any difficulty in answering the questions in papers III and IV, it is not possible to accept submission of the learned counsel for the petitioners that they have been denied fair opportunity to answer the questions at the examination.
7.
Even equally untenable is submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner that a discrimination has been practised qua the petitioners by not allowing them to appear in the examination over and above six chances specified under the Rules.
In my opinion this argument is based on a presumption that the respondents would as of necessity exclude the petitioners or any one of them from appearing at the examination in future.
If the petitioners feel that on the strength of the concession given to Ranbir Singh they or any one of them have a right to appear in the examination in 7th or 8th attempt, they or any one of them is free to apply for appearing at the examination and then it will be for the competent authority to take a decision keeping in mind precedent if any.
If at all the petitioners or anyone of them feel aggrieved by the decision of the respondents in regard to the number of chances availed by them they or any one of them shall be at liberty to seek remedy in a court of law.
8.
Now comes the argument of the learned counsel for the petitioners regarding the scope of the syllabus in the context of the question Nos. 3, 6 and 7 of Paper III and question Nos. 3, 4 and 6 of Paper IV.
In regard to three questions of Paper III as well as question Nos. 3 and 4 of paper IV the petitioners have not placed any material before the court to substantiate their plea that these questions were outside the scope of the syllabus except a bald assertion in the Writ Petition that these questions were out of the syllabus prescribed by the examining authority.
The Court repeatedly inquired from learned counsel as on what basis he is pleading that these questions were out of scope of the syllabus.
The court inquired from him as to whether any Expert on the subject has expressed opinion regarding the hope of the syllabus prescribed for three questions in paper III and question Nos. 3 and 4 in paper IV.
However, learned counsel could not produce any such Expert opinion.
In these circumstances the court cannot permit itself to be dragged in the fishing and roving enquiry about the scope of the syllabi.
It might have been altogether a different thing if some Expert in the subject had pointed out the discrepancy in the syllabus and the questions in the two papers.
In the absence of any such material, I am not inclined to make any detailed investigation to find out whether question Nos. 3, 6 and 7 of Paper III and question Nos. 3 and 4 of Paper IV were outside the scope of the syllabus.
9.
Now remains argument of the learned counsel in respect of question No. 6 of Paper IV.
Learned counsel for the petitioners has referred to two certificates issued by Shri Ram Babu Aggarwal Charted Accountant and Shri SC Sharma who is a lecturer in the Department of Commerce, CRM Jat College, Hisar.
On the strength of these certificates learned counsel has argued that these two persons can properly be termed as Experts in the subject.
They have definitely opinioned that question No. 6 in Paper IV was outside the scope of the syllabi (Annexure P-4).
Learned Deputy Advocate-General has heavily relied upon Annexure R-1 and argued that on the basis of the opinion expressed by the Examiner who was none else than Director Industrial Training and Vocational Education, Haryana, it can be said that none of the questions were outside the syllabus.
Annexure R-1 which is crucial for the purpose of determining of the issue reads as under :-  "Subject :- Haryana State S.A.S.
Part II Examination held in Feb 1992 - Representation against the questions set out of syllabus.
Will the Joint Secretary to Govt. Haryana Finance Department (P.P.S.)
kindly refer to the subject noted above ?
The comments on the representations made in the matter have been called for from the Examiners.
The Examiner in respect of paper "Advance Accountancy" has intimated that the paper was set on the basis of earlier papers and out of 38 candidates 27 are passing meaning thereby that about 75% candidates are qualifying in that paper.
This shows that no question was out of syllabus.
Had this been so the pass percentage could not have been to this extent.
With regard to paper "Post Accountancy and Financial Management, the Examiner has opined that none of the questions is out of the syllabus and has recommended that the representation being without merit and not based on facts may be rejected.
A copy of the detailed comments received from the Examiner is sent herewith.
Keeping in view the comments of the Examiners, there is no merit in the representation and may be rejected.
His office files are returned herewith.
Sd/  Deputy Secretary General,  Administration & Secretary,  Central Examination Committee,  for Chief Secretary to Govt. Haryana.
To  Joint Secretary to Govt. Haryana,  Finance Department (P.P.S.)
D.O.
No. 1/5/35/EA/CCE/SO-92 Dated Chandigarh the 4th June, 1992.
A look at Annexure R-1 shows that Examiner who had set paper of Advance Accountancy had relied upon the earlier papers.
This unequivocally shows that the person who set paper of Advance Accountancy had not applied his mind to the syllabus.
Instead he had relied on the papers of the earlier years.
Regarding paper No. IV of Cost Accounts and Financial Management, it has been stated in Annexure R-1, that the Examiner is of the opinion that none of the questions is out of syllabus.
A perusal of the letter written by the Director Industrial Training and Vocational Education Haryana dated 161992 to the Chief Secretary to Government of Haryana, which has been placed before me during the course of hearing shows that the Examiner himself recognised that there is a difference between cash flow statement and fund flow statement.
However, he has tried to justify his action by saying that this difference is not substantial.
The fact, however, remains that there existed a difference between the cash flow statement and fund flow statement.
A look at the syllabi Annexure P4 shows that it was definitely different than the previous syllabus Annexure P.5.
While in Annexure P.5 para (V) related to reconciliation between the Cost and Financial Account and details were given in that clause of the syllabi in regard to the questions which were likely to be asked to the candidates.
As against this in Annexure PA reference has been made only to cash flow statement.
It can thus be said that on account of difference in two syllabi the candidates could have entertained legitimate apprehension in their minds about scope of question No. 6.
For deciding as to whether on account of difference in two syllabi the candidates were really prejudiced or not, the matter should have been examined by the respondents by referring the question in the context of the syllabus to a subject Expert.
That could have been the only fair method accepted by the respondents to remedy the grievances of the candidates.
Instead of adopting this method the respondents rest contended by making a reference of the representation to the Examiner concerned who without going into the details of the grievance simply stated that there was a little difference between cash flow statement and fund flow statement.
It is not the argument of the learned Deputy Advocate-General that the Director, Industrial Training and Vocational Education is an Expert in the subject of Commerce or in the paper of Cost and Financial Management.
Therefore, when a controversy arose about the question paper in the context of the scope of syllabus, the respondents should have consulted a subject expert and then taken a decision.
In my opinion without making a reference of question No. 6 to an Expert it was not just for the respondents to have rejected the representation made by the respondents.
To this limited extent an appropriate direction deserves to be given to the respondents for making a reference of question No. 6 of paper IV to an Expert in the subject and after receiving of the opinion of the Expert on the question "as to whether question No. 6 was within the ambit of the syllabus Annexure P4" to take of fresh decision in the matter.
10.
In the result of this Writ Petition is partly allowed.
While rejecting all other claims made by the petitioners, I order that the respondents should send Paper IV to Head of the Department of Commerce, Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra and request him to give his opinion as to whether question No. 6 of Paper IV was outside the scope of the syllabus Annexure P-4.
If the Expert opines that question No. 6 was not outside the scope of the syllabus no further action will be required to be taken by the respondents.
However, if he finds that question No. 6 was outside the scope of the syllabus, all those candidates who have failed in paper No. IV should be given an opportunity to reappear in the examination of the said paper.
In that event it will be open to the respondents to hold a separate examination in that paper for the failed candidates or to permitting them to appear in the said paper at the succeeding examination along with other candidates.
This exercise must be completed within four months.
Petition partly allowed.