SS Grewal, J (Oral) - This Regular Second Appeal is directed against the judgment and decree passed by the Additional District Judge, Amritsar, dated 14th of September, 1993 whereby the judgment and decree passed by the trial Court on 1411991 was set aside and the suit filed by the plaintiff was dismissed.
2.
In brief facts relevant for the disposal of this appeal are that the plaintiff filed a suit for declaration that the impugned order whereby his services as driver in Punjab Roadways were terminated by General Manager, Punjab Roadways, Ferozepur, was illegal and ultra vires.
According to the plaintiff, he has rendered 12 years service prior to the impugned order and he fell ill prior to 11.1.1982, and was confined to bed.
The plaintiff was allowed to avail leave.
Thereafter, he informed the department about his illness from time to time and also informed that he was not in a position to resume his duties.
It is further alleged that he was not intimated about the fate of his leave application and that vide impugned order passed by the General Manager services of the plaintiff were terminated with retrospective effect.
It was further pleaded that the termination order was passed without following the procedure laid down under Rules 8 and 9 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 (hereinafter referred to as the Rules); that no opportunity of hearing was granted to the plaintiff before passing the impugned order and that the said order is liable to be set aside.
3.
The suit was contested by the defendants on the ground that the suit was time barred and that Civil Court had no jurisdiction to try the present suit.
It was, however, admitted that the plaintiff was working as a driver in Punjab Roadways, Ferozepur and was governed by the provisions of Rules and that his services were terminated vide impugned order dated 321983.
According to the defendants, the impugned order was legal and valid and was passed in accordance with the provisions of law and principles of natural justice.
It was denied that the plaintiff filed any application for grant of leave.
Rather it was pleaded that the plaintiff wilfully absented from duty despite the fact that a notice was published in the newspaper.
4.
From the pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed by the trial Court :-  (1) Whether the order dated 321983 terminating the services of the plaintiff is illegal, wrong, without jurisdiction and null and void ?
OPP  (2) Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the benefits of services ?
OPP.
(3) Whether the notice under Section 80 CPC was validly and legally served upon the defendants ?
OPP  (4) Relief.
The learned counsel for the parties were heard.
5.
On behalf of the plaintiff-appellant, it was rightly contended that no specific issue as to whether the suit of the plaintiff was within limitation was framed by the learned trial Court and as a result thereof the plaintiff was not afforded any opportunity to lead any evidence to prove affirmatively that his suit was within time.
Normally there is no need to frame any specific issue concerning any law point which may be taken up even in second appeal.
However, in the instant case, it has been specifically alleged that the plaintiff had actually filed appeal against the order of termination of his services and that appeal remained pending for a considerable time.
Thereafter the present suit was filed.
In case this material had been permitted to be bad, the plaintiff could have proved affirmatively that his suit was well within time.
In view of the facts and circumstances referred to above, it is deemed necessary that the trial Court should frame a specific issue concerning the point of limitation, as to whether the plaintiff's suit is within time and if not its effect.
6.
For the foregoing reasons, I hereby accept this appeal, set aside the judgment and decree passed by the Courts below and remand the case under Order 41 Rule 23-A of the Code of Civil Procedure to the trial Court which is directed to frame a specific issue as to whether the plaintiff's suit is within time and if so its effect and afford an opportunity to the parties to lead evidence.
It is further directed that the evidence already recorded shall be duly taken into consideration and there will be no need to record any fresh evidence by the trial Court in respect of the issues already framed in the case.
Thereafter the trial Court would re-decide the case on merits according to law expeditiously preferably within four months from today.
Both the parties, through their counsel, are directed to appear in the trial Court on 5101994.
Record of the trial Court be sent back forthwith along with copy of this order.
In the circumstances of the case parties are left no bear their own costs.
Appeal accepted.