AL Bahri, J - Jagdish Chander and four others, Forest Rangers working in the State of Haryana, in this petition filed under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India seek writ of mandamus directing the respondents State of Haryana and the Chief Conservator of Forests to fill all the vacancies in the Haryana Forest Department (State Service Group 'B'), in accordance with the Service Rules, as existing before July 25, 1983 when Haryana Forest Department (State Service Group 'B') 1st Amendment Rules, 1983 came into force.
Interim relief was also sought that the respondents be restrained from making any promotions in accordance with the amended rules as aforesaid depriving the petitioners of their right of promotion to Class II Service.
During the pendency of the petition, on an application made, Uma Shankar and five others were impleaded as respondents.
According to them, they were promoted in accordance with the amended rules.
2.
The petitioners joined the service as Forest Rangers as direct recruits during the period 1971 to 1974.
Before actually joining as Forest Rangers, they got training from Northern Forest Rangers College, Dehradun.
As per Haryana Forest Department (State Service Group 'B') Rules, 1980, promotion to the post of Extra Assistant Conservator of Forests was to be made from amongst the Forest Rangers 66-2/3% and by direct recruitment 33-1/3%.
The academic qualifications for promotion from amongst Forest Rangers were provided in Appendix 'B' as under :-  "(1) Should possess Ranger's certificate of the Northern Forest Ranger's College, Dehra Dun.
(2) Should have experience as Forests Ranger in the Forest Department, Haryana for not less than 8 years."
For direct recruitment also, qualifications were prescribed which need not be mentioned here.
In view of the above rule, those of the Forest Rangers who possessed certificate of the Northern Forest Rangers College, Dehra Dun and had eight years' service as Forest Ranger in the Department were only eligible for promotion to the post of Extra Assistant Conservator of Forests and the petitioners fulfilled these qualifications whereas other Forest Rangers, who were promotees, did not possess the requisite certificate from Dehra Dun College.
It was stated that those promotees Forest Rangers had taken training at Pinjore Forest School.
In June/July, 1982, there were ten vacancies in the cadre of Extra Assistant Conservators of Forests.
The petitioners were considered for promotion and their names were recommended alongwith four other Forest Rangers.
However, the State Government did not promote the petitioners.
The promotee Forest Rangers were pressurising and persuading the State not to promote the petitioners.
They were also pressurising to amend the rules.
The petitioners met respondent No. 2 and requested him to fill up the vacancies existing in the year 1982 as per rules in force.
Vide notification dated July 25, 1983, the aforesaid rules were amended which is Annexure P 1.
In the academic qualifications for the post of Extra Assistant Conservator of Forests in place of persons possessing certificate of Northern Forest Rangers College, Dehra Dun.
A "Ranger's or Forester's Certificate from a recognised institution" was substituted.
According to the petitioners, this amendment of the rules is prospective and will only be made applicable to the vacancies occurring after enforcement of this amendment.
The vacancies existing prior to July 25, 1983 were to be filled in accordance with the rules then existing.
Apprehending that State of Haryana was likely to promote other promotees to the said posts, the present writ petition was filed.
3.
While contesting the writ petition, respondent Nos. 1 and 2 broadly admitted the facts as stated in the writ petition.
However, it was stated that before amendment, Forest Rangers possessing Ranger's Certificate of Northern Forest Rangers College, Dehra Dun could be considered for promotion.
However, those of the Forest Rangers, who were recruited to service by promotion from the post of Deputy Forest Rangers, did not possess the certificate from Dehra Dun College and thus they were not eligible for further promotion.
This was a case of hardship with such promotees who were doing the same duties and sharing responsibilities like those of other Forest Rangers who possessed Certificate from Dehra Dun College.
In order to meet the canons of justice, the matter was considered thoroughly and amendment in the rules was made.
According to the amended rules, promotee Forest Rangers as well as directly recruited Forest Rangers can be promoted to the post of Extra Assistant Conservator of Forests.
With respect to the vacancies existing before the amendment of the rules, it was stated that the position was not correctly stated by the petitioners.
Ten posts of Extra Assistant Conservators of Forests were not vacant but only three posts were vacant.
Seven posts of higher ranks were available.
The proposal was sent by respondent No. 2 to the Government for considering to fill up those posts on ad hoc basis and not ten vide letter dated July 8, 1972.
The matter of amendment of rules was under active consideration of the Government.
Thus that proposal was not considered appropriate and necessary action was required to be taken after amendment of the rules.
The revised proposal was sent by respondent No. 2 keeping in view the amended rules and seven Forest Rangers were promoted on October 3, 1983 on ad hoc basis.
Putting up of pressure by the promotees on respondent Nos. 1 and 2 was denied.
However, it was stated that there was great hardship caused to the promotee Forest Rangers who could not be promoted in the absence of necessary provision in the rules.
On that account, respondent No. 1 did not think appropriate to promote the petitioners on the basis of the proposal sent by respondent No. 2 vide letter dated July 8, 1972.
In the written statement filed by Same Ram and others, respondent Nos. 3 and 5 to 8, the challenge was made to Rule 7 of Haryana Forest Department (State Service Group 'B') Rules, 1980 being violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
Reference was made to the previous rules of 1941 and 1944 which were ultimately substituted by the rules of 1980.
Briefly, the challenge is that prior to the rules of 1980, Forest Rangers used to be recruited directly as well as by promotion from Deputy Forest Rangers.
In the case of promotees, they used to have Certificate of Training from Recognised Schools whereas directly recruited Forest Rangers used to be imparted training in the Dehra Dun College.
However, after joining as Forest Rangers, the direct recruits and the promotees formed one amalgamated Service performing similar duties and sharing similar responsibilities.
They had equal chances of promotion to the post of Extra Assistant Conservator of Forests.
By enorcement of 1980 Rules aforesaid, all the chances of promotion of the promotees Forest Rangers were stopped as academic qualification for promotion was of a Certificate from the Dehra Dun College from where only direct recruits had taken the training before joining as Forest Rangers.
This classification for providing channel of promotion only to the direct recruits and ignoring the promotees was discriminatory and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
4.
The Punjab Forest Subordinate Service (Executive Section) Rules, 1944 (hereinafter called the rules of 1944) provide for service conditions of Forest Rangers, Deputy Rangers, Foresters and Forest Guards.
Qualifications and method of recruitment of Forest Rangers are provided under Rule 6 which provides for preparation of select list to fill vacancies of Forest Rangers by direct appointment.
Rule 7 provides for appointment to the post of Forest Rangers that first five grade would be by selection from among Forest Rangers in the next lower grade and the sixth grade by selection from the persons selected under rule 6.
At this stage, it may be stated that the persons who are selected for the posts of Forest Rangers directly are required to pass departmental examination and also to take training in a course conducted by Dehra Dun College.
The aforesaid rules read with Appendix 'C' attached to these rules further make it clear that condition is only for the direct recruits that they are required to take training in the course conducted by Dehra Dun College whereas for the persons promoted from the lower ranks, such a training be taken in the course conducted by Dehra Dun College was not necessary as they had taken similar training while posted on the lower rank posts from recognised schools.
5.
The Punjab Forest Service Class-II Rules, 1941 were in force before 1980 Rules came into existence.
These rules of 1941 referred to service conditions of Divisional Forest Officers, Extra Assistant Conservator of Forests and some other posts as given in Appendix 'A' attached to these rules.
Again for recruitment to the post of Extra Assistant Conservator of Forests, the recruitment was by direct appointment as well as by promotion of selected Forest Rangers as provided under Rule 4.
With respect to Forest Rangers, it was further provided in the said rule that they should have served as Forest Rangers for not less than eight years and they had not attained the age of 45 years.
Rule 5 of the Rules of 1941 provides qualifications are prescribed in sub-rule (1)(c) which is as under :-  "he must either possess a certificate of having passed one of the following examinations of a recognised University, viz. BA or BSc, including BSc (Agricultural) or have obtained the diploma or a degree in Forestry of a recognised institution.
Sub-rule (d) which is relevant reads as under :  "Government may permit persons who have attained exceptional distinction in the Forest Rangers' course at the Forest Rangers College, Dehra Dun, to become candidates for appointment to the Service."
It may be mentioned here that clear distinction was made with respect to the educational qualification as well as experience of training taken in the course conducted by Dehra Dun College.
Rule 6(3) further provides for training to be taken by direct recruits in the course of training as prescribed by the Government.
Such a training, as provided under Rule 7(3), was to be at the Dehra Dun College.
6.
From the perusal of the Rules of 1944 as well as of 1941, it is clear that as and when there was direct recruitment to the posts of Forest Rangers or Extra Assistant Conservator of Forests, such persons were required to take training in the Dehra Dun College whereas persons who were being promoted from lower rank posts were not required to take such a training in the course conducted by Dehra Dun College.
Under the rules of 1941, Forest Rangers, whether promoted or recruited directly, formed one service and for purposes of further promotion, were to stand as equals, as against persons to be directly recruited for the post of Extra Assistant, Conservator of Forests.
In 1980, the Haryana Forest Department (State Service Group 'B') Rules, 1980 (hereinafter called the rules of 1980) were enforced.
These rules relate to recruitment/promotion to the post of Extra Assistant Conservator of Forests.
Relevant rules have already been noticed above.
For purposes of promotion to the post of Extra Assistant Conservator of Forests, the academic qualifications are provided as mentioned in Rule 7 in Appendix 'B' which reads as under :-  Designation of Post Academic qualifications and experience, if any, for direct recruitment Academic qualifications and experience, if any, for appointment other than by direct recruitment.
1 2 3 Extra Assistant Conservator of Forests 1.
Atleast second class degree of Bachelor or Master of Natural Science, Mathematics, Geology, Engineering of Agriculture or an equivalent qualification 2.
Knowledge of Hindi upto Matric Standard 1.
Should possess Ranger's certificate of the Northern Forest Ranger's College, Dehra Dun.
2.
Should have experience as Forests Ranger in the Forest Department Haryana for not less than 8 years.
These rules were amended vide Annexure P.1.
In Column 3 of Appendix 'B' of the Rules of 1980, the following words were substituted in place of item No. (1) :-  "A Ranger must possess a Ranger's or Forester's Certificate from a recognised institution."
As is the stand of the State of Haryana, this amendment in the rules was made as rules of 1980 were operating a great hardship on the promotees.
7.
The contention of learned counsel for the petitioners is that since ten vacancies of Extra Assistant Conservator of Forests were existing in the year 1982 when rules of 1980 were enforced, they were required to be filled in accordance with the rules then in force, that is rules of 1980 and the amendment of the rules will have no effect.
In support of this contention, reliance has been placed on the decision of the Supreme Court in YV Rangaiah and others v. J Sreenivasa Rao and others, A.I.R. 1983 Supreme Court 852.
In para 9 of the judgment, it was observed by the Supreme Court as under :-  "Under the old rules a panel had to be prepared every year in September.
Accordingly, a panel should have been prepared in the year 1976 and transfer or promotion to the post of Sub Registrar Grade II should have been made out of that panel."
It was further observed as under :-  "The vacancies which occurred prior to the amended rules would be governed by the old rules and not by the amended rules."
8.
There is dispute regarding the vacancies which occurred after enforcement of rules of 1980.
In the writ petition in para 7, it was alleged by the petitioners that in June/July, 1982, there were ten vacancies in the cadre of Extra Assistant Conservator of Forests.
In para 8 of the writ petition, it was stated that in spite of the fact that vacancies fell vacant in the year 1982 and the names of petitioners were recommended for promotion, the State Government did not appoint the petitioners due to the reasons best known to the Government.
In the written statement filed by the State of Haryana in para 7, it was stated that in the writ petition the position was not correctly stated.
Ten posts of Extra Assistant Conservator of Forests were not vacant but only three posts were vacant.
Seven posts of higher ranks were available.
It is thereafter that it is mentioned that proposal was put up by respondent No. 2 to the Government for considering to fill up six posts on ad hoc basis and not ten, vide letter dated July 8, 1982.
In para 8 of the writ petition, it was stated, that vacancies were available in 1982 and proposal was put up for promotion.
Since the amendment of rules was under active consideration of the Government, the promotions were not made.
The reply furnished by other respondents to these paragraphs of the writ petition does not throw much light.
From these pleadings, it cannot be stated with certainty as to how many posts of Extra Assistant Conservator of Forests were in existence before the rules of 1980 came into force and how many such vacancies occurred after enforcement of rules of 1980 and before the same were amended in 1983.
Accepting the assertion in written statement of the State of Haryana, at the most it can be said that there were only three vacancies of Extra Assistant Conservator of Forests in the year 1982 and not ten as stated by the petitioners.
If recommendations were made under 1980 rules for filling up six posts as there were vacancies in the higher posts, no benefit can be derived by the petitioners from this assertion in the written statement filed by the State.
Unless and until higher posts had been filled up, there would have been no vacancies for the posts of Extra Assistant Conservator of Forests.
As mentioned in the written statement of the State, respondent No. 2 recommended for filling up six posts of Extra Assistant Conservator of Forests on ad hoc basis.
However, no promotions were made as the Government was considering to amend the rules.
The ratio of the decision of the Supreme Court, referred to above, thus cannot be applied to the case in hand for want of full details.
9.
Important question to be determined in this petition is to the validity of the rules of 1980, Appendix 'B' which limited the promotion to the posts of Extra Assistant Conservator of Forests only by the direct recruits who had been imparted training in the Dehra Dun College, although before rules of 1980 came into existence, all the Forest Rangers either promoted from lower ranks of Deputy Forest Rangers or directly appointed as such formed one amalgamated service performing similar duties.
The contention of counsel for the petitioners is that rules of 1980 are not violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution as reasonable classification has been made on the basis of educational qualifications for filling the posts of Extra Assistant Conservator of Forests.
Such a classification is permissible under the law.
In support of this contention, reliance has been placed on the decision of the Supreme Court in The State of Jammu and Kashmir v. Triloki Nath Khosa and others, 1974(1) S.L.R.
536.
That was a case relating to J&K Engineering (Gazetted) Service Recruitment Rules, 1970.
Persons were appointed directly as well as by promotion and were integrated into a common class of Assistant Engineers.
For purposes of further promotion to the cadre of Executive Engineers, the rule provided that Graduates shall be eligible for such promotion to the exclusion of Diploma Holders.
This rule was held to be not violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
In para 40 of the judgment, it was observed as under :-  "Classification on the basis of educational qualifications made with a view to achieving administrative efficiency cannot be said to rest on any fortuitous circumstances and one has always to bear in mind the facts and circumstances of the case in order to judge the validity of a classification."
On the other hand, learned counsel for the private respondents has relied upon the decision of the Supreme Court in SM Pandit and another v. State of Gujarat and others, 1972 S.L.R.
79, which was a case under Bombay Civil Services Classification and Recruitment Rules.
For purposes of promotion to the posts of Deputy Collectors, the rule provided that the same would be made either by nomination or by promotion of suitable Mamlatdars.
It was further provided that such appointment by nomination and promotion would be 50 : 50 as far as possible.
It further provided that half of the vacancies reserved for appointment by promotion shall be filled up by directly recruited Mamlatdars who have put in atleast seven years service in the post including the period spent on probation.
It was this provision which was for consideration before the Supreme Court and was held to be violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution as it created discrimination between direct recruits and the promotees in the matter of further promotion.
The other decision relied upon by the respondents is of the Supreme Court in TR Kapur and others v. State of Haryana and others, AIR 1987 Supreme Court 415.
That was a case under Punjab Service of Engineers, Class I, Public Works Department (Irrigation Branch) Rules 1964.
This decision is not helpful in deciding the case in hand for the simple reason that through argument was raised that the rule was violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution, however, no decision was given on this point although the rules was held to be void as previous sanction of the Central Government was not obtained as required under the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966.
10.
The educational qualifications required for different posts have already been noticed above.
Even for the posts of Extra Assistant Conservator of Forests for direct recruits, educational qualifications are mentioned in column 2 of Appendix 'B' that the candidate must possess atleast second class degree of Bachelor or Master of Natural Science, Mathematics, Geology, Engineering or Agriculture or an equivalent qualification.
As far as Forest Rangers are concerned, educational qualifications were provided under the rules of 1944.
Rules provided for preparing a Select List of directly recruited persons who possessed a certificate that he had passed the Intermediate Examination of a recognised University with Mathematics and one or more of the following subjects :  11.
Physics, Chemistry, Botany, Zoology.
A certificate of having passed another examination of an equivalent or higher standard was also admissible, under sub-rule (2) of Rule 6 of Rules of 1944.
Educational qualifications for members of Service other than the Forest Rangers were provided that the candidate had passed Matriculation Examination of a recognised University and had served for not less than two years at the time of the application.
From the aforesaid rules, it is clear that educational qualification for the posts of Deputy Rangers was only a Matric.
After being appointed to the service, he was required to take training in a recognised school for about ten months (School at Dharamsala).
Such of the promotee Forest Rangers were not required to take training in the College at Dehra Dun and it was only the Forest Rangers directly recruited that they were required to take training in the Dehra Dun College.
As already stated above, after being posted as Forest Rangers, there was no distinction left between direct recruits and promotee Forest Rangers.
They had equal chances of promotion to the post of Extra Assistant Conservator of Forests.
Appendix 'B' to the rules of 1980, as reproduced above, in substance provided that only directly recruited Forest Rangers would be promoted to the posts of Extra Assistant Conservator of Forest as only they had taken the training in the College at Dehra Dun.
No doubt, at Debra Dun College, the period of training is for two years.
However, the subjects of training either in the school at Dharamsala or in the Dehra Dun College are practically the same.
Subjects of training in the school are provided in Appendix 'D' to the rules of 1944 whereas subjects of training course in the College at Dehra Dun are provided in the booklet produced "Revised Rules for the Rangers Course in Forestry issued by the Government of India, Ministry of Food and Agriculture.
No doubt, after completing training either at the school at Dharamsala or such like other school situated at Pinjore, which is a recognised school, as well as in the College at Dehra Dun, some kind of certificates are issued.
However, such certificates of taking training cannot be equated to educational qualifications on the basis of which reasonable classification could be made out for the purposes of promotion to the posts of Extra Assistant Conservator of Forests.
In this context, reference may be made to the decision of the Supreme Court in Punjab Higher Qualified Teachers Union (Non-Petitioners) and others v. State of Punjab and others, AIR 1988 Supreme Court 892.
The controversy in that case is summarised in para 11 of the judgment and the decision is recorded in para 12 of the judgment.
Hence both are reproduced below :-  "11.
The controversy is now limited to the question whether JBT Teachers falling under Category B Group II are not entitled to the higher pay merely on their acquiring higher educational qualification of BA, B.T./BA, B.Ed.
etc. but that gaining professional experience of JST/JAV training was essential.
That must turn on the relevant clause in paragraph 3 relating to them which may be extracted below :  'Category 'B' Group II - Junior School Teachers (including Assistant Mistresses with BA./Inter/Matric plus JA.V.
Training).'
12.
As a matter of plain construction, we are quite clear in our mind that Graduate Teachers form a class by themselves and cannot be subjected to the further requirement of having JST/JAV training.
The words plus 'JAV training' clearly qualify the word 'Matric' and relate only to Matriculate JBT Teachers.
Such a classification for revision of pay satisfies the touchstone of Article 14 and would render the action of the State Government in seeking to discriminate between Graduate Teachers with JST/JAV training and Graduates Teachers with or without such training, impermissible as the attempt is to create a class within a class without any rational basis."
It is made clear from the ration of the decision of the Supreme Court, as referred to above, that on the basis of training taken after joining service, no discrimination could be made in the matter of payment of higher salary.
Likewise, in the present case, when direct recruits as well as promotees were doing similar type of work and had equal chances of promotion to the posts of Extra Assistant Conservator of Forests under 1941 Rules, by enforcement of the Rules of 1980 by providing in Appendix 'B' that only such of the Forest Rangers who had taken training in the Dehra Dun College and were having eight years service experience would only be promoted to the posts of Extra Assistant Conservator of Forests is clearly violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution being discriminatory.
As already stated above, only direct recruits were required to take training in the Dehra Dun College and not the promotees.
In substance, this discrimination by enforcement of Appendix 'B' of rules of 1980 completely debarred the promotees from promotion and allowed avenues of promotion only to the direct recruits which is thus violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
12.
Although the State Government has not categorically stated in written statement that Appendix 'B' of the rules of 1980 was violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution, fact remains that the State Government did not implement 1980 rules in the matter of promotion to the posts of Extra Assistant Conservator of Forests.
The matter was considered and in 1983 Appendix 'B' was amended by Annexure P.1.
It was thereafter that the matter of promotion to the posts of Extra Assistant Conservator of Forests was considered and respondents Nos. 3 to 8 were promoted as such.
Their promotions thus cannot be set aside.
For the reasons recorded above, finding no merit in the writ petition, the same is dismissed leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
SP Goyal, J  13.
I have gone through the judgment prepared by my learned brother, but I regret my inability to agree with the same.
14.
It would be useless to reproduce the pleading of the parties which have been elaborately taken notice of in the judgment of my learned brother.
I will, therefore, discuss only two questions which have been dealt with and decided.
15.
The first question relates to the number of vacancies which were in existence prior to the enforcement of the Amended Rules on July 25, 1983.
My learned brother has drawn a conclusion after going through the pleadings of the parties that only three vacancies were in existence in the year 1982.
I do not propose to discuss this matter in detail because the State can be directed to file an affidavit in clear terms as to how many vacancies were in existence prior to the enforcement of the Amended Rules.
As the case would now be referred to the third Judge, the State is directed to file the above-said affidavit within a month from today.
16.
On the second question as to whether the vacancies have to be filled according to the provisions of the Rules existing in the year 1982 or according to the Amended Rules, the matter stands concluded by the decision of the Supreme Court in YV Rangaiah and others v. J Sreenivasa Rao and others, A.I.R. 1983 SC 852.
My learned brother has, however, taken the view that as the promotees and direct recruits Forest Rangers form a common.
Cadre, their further promotion could not be confined to the Forest Rangers who had a training certificate from Dehradun College only.
He has also observed that there is no material difference between the training certificates secured from the Schools and the Dehradun College.
I am, however, unable to subscribe to this view.
This question, in fact, stands concluded by the decision of the Supreme Court in The State of Jammu and Kashmir v. Triloki Nath Khosa and others, 1974(1) S.L.R.
536 wherein the rule providing that Assistant Engineers who were only Graduates in Engineering would be eligible for further promotion, was upheld to the exclusion of the Diploma Holders.
Although it is only a certificate which is granted by the Dehradun College, but the course there is of two years and it is only after the attendance of regular classes and the passing of the exam that the certificate is granted.
The other institutions are termed as schools and the training there is only of ten months.
Simply because the subjects are the same, it cannot be said that the qualifications acquired are also equivalent.
Subjects in the Pre-degree Course may be similar to those in the Degree Course, but on that basis it cannot be said that there is no difference in the qualifications acquired.
A study of two years obviously clothes the students with better qualifications than a study of ten months in the same subjects.
The claim of the petitioners, therefore, deserves to be upheld.
This case, therefore, may be laid before my Lord the Chief Justice for referring it to a third Judge.
JUDGMENT DT. 6594 OF HON'BLE MR JUSTICE MS LIBERHAN  MS LIBERHAN, J  17.
The sole question to be determined in this case is whether vacancies for promotion arising before the amendment of the rules with respect to eligibility condition are to be filled in accordance with the provisions of the rules as existing on the date when the vacancies arise.
18.
Sequel of facts in which the question came up for determination before me is, it was observed by Hon'ble AL Bahri, J that the mode of recruitment feeding cadre to the post of Forest Ranger and Extra Assistant Conservator of Forests was to be by direct recruitment as well as by promotion.
The direct recruits were required to undergo a training at the Northern Forest Rangers College, Dehra Dun.
The promotees and the direct recruits formed a common cadre and used to discharge identical functions.
They stood equal for further promotion as Extra Assistant Conservator of Forests.
In 1980, the Haryana Forest Department (State Service Group 'B') Rules, 1980, (hereinafter called "the rules of 1980") were enforced.
Under these rules, eligibility conditions for promotion to the post of Extra Assistant Conservator of Forests were that one should possess Ranger's Certificate of the Northern Forest Ranger's College, Dehra Dun and should have an experience as Forest Ranger in the Forest Department, Haryana, for not less than eight years.
With effect from July 25, 1983, the eligibility condition as changed and it was substituted for "A ranger must possess a Ranger's or Forester's Certificate from a recognised institution".
This amendment was brought by the Haryana Forest Department (State Service Group 'B') "the Rules of 1983".
The petitioners claimed that the ten vacancies which had arisen for promotion to the post of Extra Assistant, Conservator of Forests, should be filled from amongst the eligible candidates in accordance with the eligibility conditions under the rules then prevalent.
The qualifications provided by the substituted Rules of 1983 cannot be enforced with retrospective effect and cannot be taken note of while filling up the vacancies that had arisen prior to the amendment of the rules.
The respondents challenged vires of 1980 Rules, restricting the promotion to the candidates possessing Ranger's Certificate from Northern Forest Ranger's College, Dehra Dun, being violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India, inter alia, contending that the Classification amongst the persons belonging to the same cadre on the basis of qualification is unreasonable.
It is not a permissible classification under the law.
The Hon'ble Judge after taking note of 1974(1) S.L.R.
536, 1972 S.L.R.
79 and AIR 1987 Supreme Court 415 observed that persons, who have passed Ranger's Certificate from the Northern Forest Ranger's College, Dehra Dun, after undergoing a training for two years and the others possessing a recognised school training only for ten months cannot be described as equals.
Certificate of training cannot be equated to the educational qualification and on the basis of educational qualifications reasonable classification could be made for promotion to the post of Extra Assistant Conservator of Forests.
After taking note of the judgment in Punjab Higher Qualified Teachers Union v. State of Punjab and Ors., AIR 1988 SC 892 the Hon'ble Judge came to the conclusion that on the basis of training taken after joining the service, no discrimination could be made in the matter of payment of higher salary.
It was found as a natural corrolary to the above proposition of law that further promotion on the basis of training with a common experience of eight years would be violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution, being discriminatory.
It was further observed that in substance 1980 Rules completely debar the promotee from promotion and the avenue of promotion was available to the direct recruits only.
Taking note of the conduct of the Government, not filling the posts in conformity with 1980 Rules in 1982 when the vacancies fell, it was inferred that the State never intended to implement the Rules, which impliedly was unjust.
19.
Hon'ble S P Goyal, J while differing with Hon'ble A L Bahri, J, took the view that keeping in view 1974(1) S.L.R.
536 and A.I.R. 1983 Supreme Court 852, the vacancies have to be filled in accordance with the rules then prevalent.
The exclusion of the promotees from promotion on the basis of the qualification having been acquired by the direct recruits from the Northern Forest Ranger's College, Dehra Dun, which is a course of two years and not equating the course with a certificate obtained from other institutions, where the period of training is only six to ten months, has been held to be reasonable and a valid classification as obviously students with two years' study are clothed with better qualification than the students studying for ten months in the same subjects.
Thus, S P Goyal, J found the rule to be valid and further in accordance with the rules then prevalent.
20.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties.
The propositions canvassed before me that the classification on the basis of educational qualifications or training, keeping in view the length of the period, is a reasonable classification.
21.
I am of the view that the matter is not res integra.
Classification on the basis of educational qualification came up for consideration before the Hon'ble Supreme Court in (i) K Jagadeesan v Union of India, 1990 Judgments Today 247, wherein it was observed that providing eligibility condition of holding a degree for promotion to one post while not for another from the same cadre would not be regarded as unreasonable.
It is for the Government to decide the qualification as eligibility condition for promotion.
The same cannot be held to be unreasonable unless the qualifications provided are totally irrelevant.
22.
In P Murugesan and others v. State of Tamil Nadu and others, 1993(2) SCT 416 (SC) : 1993(2) Supreme Court Cases 340 almost all para materia facts were there as in the present case regarding promotion.
Distinction between diploma holders and degree holders was maintained amongst the Engineering cadre and the supervisor cadre, forming one cadre.
Classification on the basis of academic qualification was held to be well accepted for promotion.
It was further observed that categorisation in the same cadre and putting the restriction for promotion amongst persons discharging the same functions with same responsibilities cannot per se be held to be discriminatory, unreasonable, unjust or inequitable or amounting to hostile discrimination.
It was further observed that after 1974, Courts were of the view that even where direct recruits and promotees are integrated into a common class, they could for the purposes of promotion to the higher cadre be classified on the basis of educational qualifications.
The classification must be truly founded on some substantial difference which distinguishes the persons grouped together from those left out of the group and that such differential attributes must bear a just and rational relation to the object sought to be achieved.
It is further laid down the scope of judicial scrutiny and observed that ordinarily Courts judgment shall not be substituted for that of the Legislature.
Need for the classification for achieving a particular level of administrative efficiency is within the purview of the Legislative authority.
I may hasten to add that the Hon'ble Supreme Court observed that achieving administrative efficiency in the engineering services, is at least presumptive evidence of a higher mental equipment.
On the anology of the law laid down by the above referred judgment, I am of the considered view that the direct recruits and the promotees, though belonging to one cadre, viz the Forest Rangers, represented two different categories, performing similar duties and discharging similar functions.
Limiting the promotion chances on the basis of academic qualifications cannot be said to be not permissible.
It was further observed in the above referred judgment that the vacancies which arose prior to the date of commencement of the amended rule, should be filled in accordance with the provisions of the unamended rules.
23.
The conspectus of law as laid down in (1983) 3 Supreme Court Cases 284, 1988 Supplementary SCC.
740 : 1990(1) SCC.
411 : (1990) 3 SCC.
157 and 1991(5) S.L.R.
467 the judgment of this Court emerges as under :-  that ordinarily the persons eligible for being considered for promotion on the date the vacancies had arisen, cannot be made ineligible for promotion on account of amendment of the rules.
Unless the rules are made applicable retrospectively, persons eligible cannot be deprived of the consideration for promotion in accordance with the eligibility conditions, prevailing at the time when the vacancies became available.
It has been emphasised that there is not a slightest doubt in principle that the posts which fell vacant prior to the amended rules, would be governed by the old rules and not by the new rules.
24.
Dictum of law, as observed above laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court and followed by this Court in Surjit Kaur and others v. State of Punjab and others, 1991(3) SCT 365 (P&H) : 1991(5) S.L.R.
467 is the law of the land, holding field till date.
25.
In view of the observations made above and the law laid down by the Supreme Court, with respect, I cannot agree with the view that providing eligibility conditions on the basis of qualification, keeping in view the length of training and limiting the chances of promotion by categorization among the persons in the same cadre on the basis of length of training or the qualification from the institute would be discriminatory, unjust and would be violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
I am fully in agreement with the view taken by the Hon'ble Judge, (SP Goyal, J) that the qualification acquired by the persons spending two years positively equip them better to discharge their functions than the persons who got the training only for ten months.
Apart from this, the direct recruits to the post of Forest Ranger were required to possess the degree course while the promotees, were to possess the training with Matriculation as qualification.
Further I am fully in agreement with the view that the vacancies arising before the amendment of the rules are to be filled from amongst the eligible persons in accordance with the rules then prevalent.
I cannot add anything to the law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court and followed by this Court.
Consequently, I agree with the view taken by the Hon'ble SP Goyal, J  In view of the observations made above, the respondents are bound to fill up the vacancies which arose prior to July 25, 1983, in accordance with the unamended rules, without reference to the eligibility qualification provided by the 1983 rules.
Resultantly, the respondents are directed to ascertain the vacancies which arose prior to the amendment of the rules, i.e. prior to July 25, 1983, and consider the persons eligible for promotion, keeping in view eligibility conditions then prevalent for promotion against these vacancies.
The writ petition is allowed with no order as to costs, with the directions stated above.
Petition allowed.