MS Liberhan, J - The questions raised in Civil Writ Petitions numbers.
15730, 16291 of 1992 and 681, 691, 721, 1372, 1796, 2236, 2583, 2656, 2657, 2767, 4009, 4085, 4138 and 4244 of 1993 can fairly be stated to be common.
The substantial material facts too are common.
Thus all the Civil Writ Petitions are being disposed of by this common judgment.
Any particular question other than the common question in view of the peculiar facts would be decided in the later part of the judgment.
2.
Succinctly the sequence of events are :  3.
That the Government Medical College, Amritsar is affiliated with Guru Nanak Dev University.
Similarly, the Medical College, Patiala is affiliated with Punjabi University.
In the relevant session 30 students were admitted to the Government Medical College, Patiala for the Four Years' Course of 'Bachelor Dental Surgery.
Similarly students were admitted to Government Medical College, Amritsar in the First Year of Bachelor Dental Surgery.
Fortuitously about 28 students left the Course in the second year resulting.
in 28 seats fall in vacant in the second year at Government Medical College, Patiala.
Almost in similar circumstances 21 seats fell vacant in Government Medical College, Amritsar in the second year.
There is no direct admission to the Course in the second year.
The vacant seats in the second year could be filled in, from amongst students seeking migration from different recognized Medical Colleges affiliated with recognized Universities.
In the background stated above the factual matrix that emerged on hearing the learned counsel for the parties and from reading the writ petitions and written statements filed in some of the writ petitions can be stated as under :  4.
The petitioners in respective writ petitions alongwith other students applied for migration to the second year B.D.S.
Course from time to time i.e. commencing from August, 1991 to October, 1992.
It may be noticed that 13 students were allowed migration in September, 1991.
They are pursuing their course since then.
Substantial number of students who applied for migration are from Budha Institute of Dental Sciences and Hospital, Patna, affiliated with Maghad University.
Amongst these students seeking migration, some were studying in their respective colleges where they were admitted initially and others have taken examination of the First Year and awaiting their result.
The result of most of the petitioners/students was declared in October, 1992 exceptions apart.
In September, 1992 on the recommendation of the Committee approved by the Punjabi University, Patiala, about 13 students were allowed to join Medical College, Patiala by way of migration in the second year of the Course.
The result of the first year of the B.D.S.
Course of Government Medical College, Patiala was declared on 2171992.
The student who secured least marks in the first year of the Course in Government Medical College, Patiala had obtained 391 marks.
Keepin this fact in view 9 students who secured 391 or more marks in the first year of their Course in their respective Colleges were allowed migration on 26.8.1992.
Meanwhile, the Authorities of Government Medical College, Patiala decided to fill up not only the seats that had fallen vacant by migration but also to allow migration in the second year fully to the extent of its sanctioned strength of 40 students.
As a consequence of the said decision the Punjabi University sought the recommendation from the authorities of Government Medical College, Patiala for 18 seats lying vacant.
A list of 10 plus 3 students seeking migration on merit and compassionate ground was recommended by the College Authorities on 1381992.
Finally, the University on the recommendation of the Committee constituted by it approved the migration of the students on 27.11.1992.
It is this approved list by the University which has been challenged in all the writ petitions.
5.
Though there are other grounds advanced but the substantive thrust of the arguments of the learned counsel for the petitioners as substantially urged before us was on two counts; firstly that the students lower in merit or who were ineligible for migration as having not qualified from the recognized institutions/Universities were allowed migration in violation of the rules and for extraneous consideration; and the students from different Institutions which though approved by the Dental Medical Council of India but still not recognized were allowed migration to the Government Medical College, Patiala.
6.
The Dental Medical Council of India laid down guidelines to be followed for allowing migration.
Substantially, the guidelines are to the effect that the migration can be allowed on compassionate grounds and on the basis of merit within three months from the declaration of result with a further rider that no migration should be permitted during the clinic training and that not more than 5% of the intake of Medical Institute should be allowed migration in one year.
It is further provided that where a case is not covered by any of the regulation as substantially referred to above the same be referred to the Dental Medical Council of India for consideration of individual merit.
7.
In view of the guidelines laid down by the Dental Medical Council of India, the University framed its guidelines regulating the migration.
The regulation '4' of the Regulations runs as under :  "The number of students migrating/transferring to/from any one medical college should not exceed the limit of 5% of its annual intake in one year."
8.
It would be expedient to note that the Division Bench of this Court vide its order dated December 18, 1992 in Civil Writ Petition No. 8789 of 1992 laid down the guidelines to be followed by the Medical Dental Colleges in Punjab for allowing migration to the students which run as under :  1.
Migration of a candidate from a Medical/Dental College, which has been duly recognized by the Medical Council of India/Dental Council of India shall only be permitted.
2.
Joint test for deciding inter se merit of candidates seeking migration be held.
The candidates studying in Medical Colleges in Punjab are also eligible to sit in such joint test.
The Committee will finalise the steps to be taken for holding this test at the earliest, preferably before the next academic session.
3.
The migrating student must have :  (i) passed the 1st Professional MBBS/BDS examination;  (ii) passed pre-Medical or its equivalent examination with 50% or more marks in the subjects of English, Physics, Chemistry (Organic and Inorganic) and Biology in the aggregate;  (iii) in the case of candidate belonging to Scheduled Caste/Tribes the candidate must have passed the Pre-Medical or its equivalent examination with 45% or more marks in the subjects of English, Physics, Chemistry (Organic and Inorganic) and Biology;  (iv) provided further that the candidate should have secured at least the same number of marks in the first Professional MBBS/BDS examination (Annual) as obtained by the last candidate admitted in second Professional Course.
4.
(i) Migration will be allowed only if a vacant seat in the particular batch of admission is available;  (ii) obtained the permission of the Principal of College concerned as well as the University from which he wants to migrate;  (iii) the migration will be allowed within two months in case of Medical Colleges and one month in case of Dental Colleges after declaration of the result by the University, to which the migration is being sought;  (iv) number of seats for which migration is to be allowed will not exceed the number of vacant seats in a particular batch in the College.
The Principal of the College will recommend the number of candidates seeking migration strictly as per the number of vacant seats.
However, 20 seats are taken out of the purview of the joint test and will be filled by the Committee on peculiar facts of a particular case but subject to the candidate fulfilling other conditions.
This relaxation is allowed for highly exceptional compassionate cases migrating from States other than Punjab.
5.
The migrating student must join the new College within 15 days of the sanction of the migration by the University.
Otherwise, his migration will be automatically cancelled unless the period, is for sufficient cause, extended by the Vice-Chancellor.
6.
(i) Migration/transfer would be only permitted by the University on the recommendation of the Principal of the College concerned to which the migration/transfer is being sought.
7.
The inter se merit of the candidates who are successful in the joint test for admission to various colleges in Punjab will be decided as per the conditions applicable to the candidates in the entrance test of PMT to the MBBS/BDS degree, i.e., Punjab Medical Entrance Test.
9.
As directed by the Division Bench after laying down the guidelines, the Punjabi University, Patiala, constituted a committee to go into the complaints and recommend the migration in accordance with the guidelines laid down by this Court.
10.
We may hasten to add that prayer made in almost in all the Civil writ petitions being disposed of by this judgment was not for the cancellation of admission already made, though during the course of arguments some of the petitioners sought the amendment of their petitions so as to implead the candidates who have already been allowed migration and prayed for cancellation of their admission, which stands already made.
In one or two petitions persons were impleaded as respondents as they have secured less marks than the petitioners.
11.
The learned counsel for the respondents has contended that six persons i.e., Taranbir Kamboj, Pawandeep Kaur, Ramandeep Kaur, Ruchika Sachdeva, Jaideep Mahindra and Geetanjali Duggal were granted provisional admission under the orders of this Court, they have secured 434, 417, 408, 391, 421 and 399 marks respectively in their first year of B.D.S.
in their respective colleges.
A committee was constituted to look into the matter with respect to the granting of admission by way of migration to the candidates which has submitted its report dated 1031993 Annexure P.8 in Civil Writ Petition No. 2657 of 1993, whereby the committee has recommended the cancellation of the admission/migration of Miss Minakshi Goyal, Miss Amanpreet Kaur, Miss Pankaj Garg, Miss Preeti Bachan and of Ramandeep on decision of the enquiry pending against her.
The committee fixed number of the vacant seats as 10 plus 3 and has drawn out merit for admission of the above named six students.
12.
About 13 students were allowed migration in September, 1991.
They are pursuing their studies.
Their migration was not even seriously challenged.
Similarly, some students were allowed migration under the orders of this Court.
The conspectus of accepted principles as laid down precedently are :  (a) A person does not have any fundamental right or even a legal right to obtain transfer from one medical college to another.
No such right could be enforced by invoking the writ jurisdiction.
It has been observed that migration is a facility to be used by the students under numerous pressures of circumstances of compassionate circumstances.
For the above observations reference may be made to Dhirai Sarwal v. State of Punjab, AIR 1990 Punjab and Haryana 78; Nidhi Kumar v. State, AIR 1990 Bombay 390.
13.
In Punjab Engineering College, Chandigarh v. Sanjay Gulati, AIR 1983 SC 580 it was observed as under :  "Cases like these in which admissions granted to students in educational institutions are quashed raise a sensitive human issue.
It is unquestionably true that the authorities who are charged with the duty of admitting students to educational institutions must act fairly and objectively.
If admissions to these institutions are made on extraneous considerations and the authorities violate the norms set down by the rules and regulations, a sense of (sic) and frustration is bound to be generated in the minds of those unfortunate young students who are wrongly or purposefully left out.
Indiscipline in educational institutions is not wholly unconnected with the lack of sense of moral values on the part of the administrators and teachers alike.
It was further observed that, "the time consumed in Court, creates further difficulties, in adjusting equalities between students who are wrongly admitted and those who are unjustly excluded.
Inevitably, the Court has to rest content with and academic pronouncement of the true legal position.
Students who are wrongly admitted are not suffer the consequences of the manipulations, if any, made on their behalf by interested persons.
This has virtually come to mean that one must get into an educational institution by means, fair or foul.
Once you are in, no one will put you out.
Law's delays work their wonders in such diverse fashions."
14.
Although the judgment relates to admission yet the principles laid down by it can be applied in the case in hand i.e. of migration as a principle of good conscience and equity.
15.
In Rajendra Prasad v. Karnataka University, AIR 1986 SC 1448 it has been observed that,  "Now it is true that the appellants were not eligible for admission to the Engineering Degree Course and they had not legitimate claim to such admission.
But if wrongful admission must lie more upon the Engineering Colleges which granted admission then upon the appellants.
It was further observed that, "the fault lies with the Engineering Colleges which admitted the appellants because the Principals of these Engineering Colleges must have known that the appellants were not eligible for admission and yet for the sake of capitation fee in some of the cases they granted admission to the appellants.
We do not see why the appellants should suffer for the sins of the managements of these Engineering Colleges."
16.
Each University need not to adopt same provisions about migration as each one has to deal with its own problems.
17.
Certainty is in public interest.
The settled things should not be unsettled which would result in injustice to a person who cannot be compensated in any manner, particularly in case of young students who are likely to carry the scar of treatment meted out to them throughout the life particularly when they are not specifically instruments in securing a particular advantage by any fraudulent means.
18.
Perennial vigilance is the watch words in the enforcement of one's legal rights in Courts.
The Courts while granting the relief to a petitioner has to keep in mind the ground realities and would also keep in mind numerous factors in moulding the relief particularly involving balancing exercise between the equity and legal rights and relative harm likely to occur to the respective parties.
The factors like, lapse of period in studying which is likely to be lost, relative gains to the petitioners, on account of their legal right, the nature of impropriety committed in admission and the participation of the students in securing the admission etc. are to be kept in view.
19.
On a careful assiduously examining the facts from the morsel information supplied by the petitioners and the respondents either in the petitions, in the written statements or during the course of arguments, we may venture to state that after taking into consideration the migration already allowed and students who were allowed to join the course either by the University or under the orders of this Court, only 13 seats are left to be filled in.
The Session to which the migration is being sought has virtually come to an end.
20.
The majority of the students in the writ petitions are the students from Budha Medical College, Patna.
The sanctioned strength of this college is 50.
Though it granted admission to 100 students.
The admission was granted without there being any consideration on merit.
21.
There is no gainsaying that the students who were allowed migration did not either deliberately and advisedly allowed the time to elapse.
The students having allowed migration with the passage of time cannot be reverted back to the colleges of their original admission.
Loss of precious academic year of students already allowed migration without any overt act specifically attributed would be too much in the absence of specific acts attributed to the students, no such inference of procuring admission by unlawful means drawn or assumed.
22.
The learned counsel for the University was vehemently argued that there is an established procedure for migration.
The students apply to the College for migration with no objection certificate from the college and the University from where he is seeking migration.
The Principal of the College decides the last date for allowing migration keeping in view the commencement of the studies of the class in which migration is sought, though the rules enable a person to apply for migration within three months from the date of declaration of the result of the students in the college in which migration is being sought.
We may hasten to add that this time period is not sacrosanct and mandatory.
It is an enabling rule.
The Principal of the college after selecting the candidates in accordance with the regulations and the procedure provided by the University and further keeping in view the guidelines provided by the Dental Medical Council of India sends the list to the University and the University after satisfying itself about the propriety of the admission by migration finally approves/decides regarding the recommendation.
23.
In the petitions in hand it is not the case of ordinary migration of a student here and there.
The exceptional circumstances came into being in Government Medical College, Patiala wherefrom a large number of students say about 28 in the second year shifted to other course, thus causing 28 seats to become vacant.
It is in view of the peculiar circumstances that some relaxation of the rules was granted by the University, though in substance all the rules of the University as well as the guidelines of the Dental Medical Council of India have been complied with.
24.
It has been categorically accepted that the last student allowed migration by the College and approved by the University was the one who applied before the cut off date i.e. 3171992 as decided by the Principal keeping in view the declaration of the result of the Government Medical College, Patiala on 2171992.
The admission to other students was granted under the orders of this Court.
Learned counsel for the respondents while meeting the arguments of the learned counsel for the petitioners that the students securing less marks than the petitioners as well as the students securing less marks than the minimum marks obtained by the students of the college allowing migration has contended that it was done with an object to substantially comply with the guidelines of the Dental Medical Council of India to the effect that not more than 5% students from one college would be allowed migration.
It was further contended that though in order to fill the seats in some cases the rules have been relaxed, but not to an unlimited extent i.e. care has been taken to ensure that all the seats are not to be filled from amongst the students seeking migration from Budha Medical College alone.
If all the students of Budha Medical College, Patna which admitted the students beyond the sanctioned strength are allowed migration then in all probability students from other institutions would have to be denied migration.
If such a situation is allowed it would obviously obliterate one of the fundamental guidelines provided by the Dental Medical Council of India that only to the extent of 5% students migration should be allowed from one Institution and it would result in totally unjust result.
25.
It may not be noticed that it is wiser as generally in all, except exceptional circumstances that the Court must restrain from interfering in academician's domain for admission or migration which is sole purview of the academician.
Ordinarily the Court should not lay down guidelines of fructifying the principles for allowing migration which will dampen the creativity of academicians to permit them to lay their own standard according to the exigencies arising from time to time in a situation to situation and in the changed circumstances and conditions.
It is wholly arbitrary acts of the Colleges and the Universities that the Courts should ordinarily interfere.
26.
Neither there is any doubt nor it is suggested that the students allowed migration were vexatious, of course the outcome is vexatious.
It is in view of the peculiar facts and circumstances referred to above that the students were allowed migration, though doubt caused, about the manner in which migrations were allowed is not devoid of merit to some extent, while in implementing conflicting guidelines and regulations in peculiar circumstances of this case, yet it is in the interest of justice that the books should be closed and let each of the student should go on with his studies.
It is better to end this embittered battle particularly when the petitioners themselves are also not bona fidely seeking migration in peculiar circumstances.
Ordinarily, the petitioners having accepted the college of admission at Patna would not have thought of migration except a few students on peculiar compassionate circumstances.
It is only because a large number of seats fell vacant that the students in such large numbers felt encouraged to apply for migration.
It is further deliberated the decision of the petitioners to come nearer to their home towns by taking advantage of the fortuitous circumstances coming to being.
27.
We may venture to state that it is not a case of admission where in some public notice is required to be given or the last date with respect to the receipt of forms is to be notified.
Migration cannot be equated with the fresh admission on merit.
We may hasten to add that there is no gainsaying or any doubt that if there are a large number of students more than one students are seeking migration against a particular number of seat or seats, the same should be and we hope would be allowed in accordance with the merit inter se if the circumstances of each student in which migration is being sought are pari materia with each other.
Of course, the rules of the University granting permission for migration as well as the guidelines provided for by the Dental Medical Council of India have to be complied with in all eventualities.
Even the standards of education in the College from where migration is being sought and in the college in which it is being sought cannot be lost sight of.
28.
Another factor which cannot be lost sight of is that the petitioners applied for quashing of migration allowed as far back as in September, 1991 and August, 1992 as late as in 1993.
When the last petition was filed in April, 1993 the academic year had almost come to an end the exams were to commence in May, 1993.
29.
Presently, a committee was constituted to look into the matter with respect to grant of admission by way of migration.
The committee has submitted its report dated 1031993 which has been produced before us and is marked 'X'.
The committee has recommended the cancellation of admission/migration of miss Minakshi Goyal, Miss Amanpreet Kaur, Miss Pankaj Garg, Miss Preeti Bachan and of Ramandeep of decision of enquiry pending against him.
Further the committee fixed the number of the vacant seats as 10 plus 3 and has drawn out a merit list for admission against the seats including the seats falling vacant of the above named six students.
30.
We may conclude that the balancing exercise done by the committee vide report mark 'X' i.e. Annexure P.8 in Civil Writ Petition No. 2657 of 1993 in our view is fairly and correctly made out.
No substantial material has been pointed out for not accepting the said report as the same has been prepared keeping in view the guidelines laid down by the Dental Medical Council of India, the guidelines spelled out by the Division Bench of this Court as reproduced in the earlier part of the judgment as well as the regulations of the University.
It has further kept in view that at this stage the guidelines laid down by this Court for holding competitive test for migration may not be feasible in the facts and circumstances of the case in hand.
With due respect the fixation of percentage of the seats to be filled on compassionate grounds by the Division Bench is not accordance with the regulations or the guidelines of the Dental Medical Council of India and is not free from doubt.
The concept of migration itself originates in compassion and as observed earlier migration is not a right enforceable in law.
At a given point of time the compassion may prevail over merit in granting migration.
31.
So far as the prayer in CWP No. 2236 of 1993 for migration to the Government Medical College, Amritsar is concerned no relief can be granted to the petitioners in view of the changed circumstances having come into being during the pendency of the writ petition i.e. the session in which migration is being sought has already come to an end apart from the fact that the petitioner never applied for migration on compassionate ground.
32.
In civil writ petition 2657 of 1993, the learned counsel for the petitioner vehemently and emphatically urged that petitioner Amandeep Anu secured 388 marks and is similarly situated in all respects as Miss Nidhi Goyal, Miss Anjali, Miss Harleen Chauhan and Miss Rajbinder Kaur who have been proposed admissions on compassionate grounds.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has been able to persuade us that case of this petitioner needs to be considered for migration on compassionate grounds as she has lost her father and her mother is a case of kidney transplant.
She has got only a minor younger brother.
Two of the above named candidates were proposed to allow migration merely on the alleged compassionate ground that their close relatives were the victims of terrorists activities in Punjab.
Nothing substantial has been disclosed so far as the compassionate grounds of other candidates are concerned.
There is no gainsaying that Amandeep Anu has much higher merit than the candidates recommended by the Committee for allowing migration on compassionate grounds.
33.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has been able to satisfy us that her case deserves consideration for granting permission for migration.
Learned counsel for the University too, mildly accepted that her case is really a case of compassionate grounds and as such she should be considered for migration if and when any seat falls vacant particularly if a seat falls vacant on the completion of the enquiry against Ramandeep Singh.
We are of the considered opinion that she need not wait for the completion of enquiry into the complaint against Ramandeep Singh and the result of said enquiry resulting in cancellation of his migration.
She has got higher marks than any of the candidates who have been recommended for migration on compassionate grounds.
It would be highly unjust that she should be ignored for migration as no special circumstances have come to our notice to prefer the other four candidates who have been allowed migration over her.
Consequently, we direct that migration of Miss Minakshi Goyal, Miss Amanpreet Kaur, Miss Pankaj Garg and Miss Preeti Bachan including Amandeep Anu will be permitted according to the merit in their examination of B.D.S.
Part (I).
It would be the student lowest in merit who should be accommodated in case of cancellation of the seat of Ramandeep Singh.
34.
As against 30 seats, a large number of students have already been accommodated, we should not like to burden the college further as suggested by the learned counsel for the petitioner that since in the first year the college has admitted 53 students consequently, the strength in the second year can also be increased to 53 as infrastructure for imparting education to 53 students is already available.
However, the colleges will be at liberty to apply to the Dental Medical Council of India/Govt.
of India as the case may be, to allow them to increase the strength in accordance with the rules in order to undo the injustice to the petitioners who have secured more marks than some of the students who were allowed migration, though no facts have been brought before us under what circumstances their migration were allowed and in view of the circumstances of this case, no specific direction can be issued.
It is left to the College Authorities.
35.
Keeping in view the observations made above and the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case, we direct the respondents to grant migration, in accordance with the report of the Committee mark 'X' subject to the modifications as observed above after cancellation of the migration as suggested.
36.
We may express that o far as the candidate lowest in merit is concerned, she may also be accommodated by creating an additional seat if necessary, keeping in view her compassionate considerations.
We hope that Dental Medical Council of India, as well as other authorities shall grant appropriate permission for creation of a seat in order to accommodate a candidate on compassionate grounds in view of peculiar facts and circumstances of this case as narrated above and the fact that her case has already been accepted by the Committee for migration on compassionate grounds in terms of the guidelines laid down in the judgment of the Division Bench of this Court.
37.
This writ petitions are disposed of accordingly with no order as to costs.
Ordered accordingly.