SK Jain, J - Identical question of facts and law are involved in Regular Second Appeal Nos. 711 to 728 of 1989 and, therefore, the same are being disposed of by this single judgment.
2.
Appellants were appointed JBT teachers in various districts of the State of Haryana on various dates.
In pursuance of the recommendation of Kothari Commission, new grades of pay were granted to them in the year 1967 with effect from 5.1.1968.
In addition thereto 15% of the teachers were to be granted selection grade.
In the year 1972, some new districts in Haryana were created as a result of which, Dadri tehsil of Mahendergarh district was attached with new district of Bhiwani whereas Rewari Tehsil of District Gurgaon was attached with Mahendergarh district.
The teachers posted in Dadri and Rewari Tehsils were asked to opt for the District (Bhiwani/Mahendergarh) with a clear condition that in case they opted for the new district, they will lose their seniority and they would be fixed at the bottom.
Some of the teachers, therefore, opted for the District to which their tehsil was attached.
Most of the teachers who opted for Bhiwani/Mahendergarh District were getting selection grade.
Fresh seniority lists were prepared.
The teachers who had opted for Mahendergarh district and were getting selection grade were placed on the top of the seniority list on the ground that they were getting higher scale of pay in spite of the fact that they were allowed to opt for the new district on the clear condition that they will be placed at the bottom of the seniority list of the new district irrespective of the fact that they were getting selection grade.
3-5.
The selection grade was released on the basis of the number of sanctioned permanent posts and not on the basis of total cadre strength.
Besides this, the number of teachers who were getting selection grade and had been transferred to Mahendergarh district was deducted from the number of teachers who had to get selection grade in that district.
They agitated the matter through representation and by serving notice under Section 80 CPC.
Thereafter, selection grades were granted from various dates vide order dated 15.12.1981.
Such teachers had brought civil suits for a decree of declaration to the effect that they were entitled to get the selection grade and other benefits of service w.e.f.
1121967 or 1.11.1969 or 981973 in pursuance of the recommendation of the Kothari Commission and that the seniority list prepared by the Education Department was liable to be corrected and further that the impugned order dated 15.12.1981 regarding selection grade was liable to be set aside being illegal and void.
The suits were contested by the department but were decreed by the trial Court.
Appeals were decreed by the department challenging the said judgments and decrees.
Some of the plaintiffs had also filed cross-appeals.
All these appeals were heard by Additional District Judge, Narnaul and disposed of vide single judgment dated September 5, 1988 thereby disposing the appeals in the following terms :-  "It is held that the selection grade is to be given on the basis of total sanctioned strength and not on the basis of permanent posts only.
It is also held that the seniority list of 1541973 was not prepared in accordance with the rules and it is null and void and non-operative and the State is directed to prepare a fresh seniority list in accordance with service rules within four months and to release arrears of pay etc., within next two months, on the basis of cominuous length of service i.e. the person joining first would be senior than the person joining later.
It is further held that seniority of the persons who have come from Gurgaon district would also be fixed in accordance with the aforesaid rule of continuous length of service.
It is also held that the selection grade is to be released on the basis of sanctioned strength and the transfer of teachers who were getting selection grade to district Bhiwani will have no effect on the rights of the private appellants/respondents to get the selection grade on the basis of 15% strength of the cadre and those posts which have gone to Bhiwani will not be counted.
It is further held that the plaintiffs will be entitled to recover arrears of difference in pay only for three years and two months from the date of filing of the suit.
In case of Ram Bilas-appellant the trial Court had ordered the grant of selection grade with effect from 981973 while in the case of Pehlad, Om Prakash, Bal Gobind, Ram Avtar, Suraj Bhan, Hans Raj, Daya Nand, Anand Sarup, Bhagirath etc., the selection grade was ordered to be given w.e.f.
15.9.73.
However, the State has been directed to prepare a fresh seniority list on the basis of rule given hereinabove, the order of grant of selection grade to the plaintiff, with specific dates, cannot be sustained and the same is set aside.
However, it is directed that in case it is not possible to prepare seniority list within four months and further to release arrears in the next two months ie arrears are not released within six months, then the arrears would be released with effect from the date the plaintiffs have claimed and it would be subject to adjustment as per final seniority list and grant of selection grade."
6.
It is that common judgment and decree dated 5th September, 1988 passed by the lower appellate Court which has been appealed against by the defendants in the above mentioned regular second appeals and which requires my examination of its sustainability.
7.
I have seen the pleadings in the suits, evidence led by the parties in the suits and the judgments of both the Courts below and have also heard learned counsel for the parties.
8.
First point of controversy is as to whether the total cadre strength and not only the sanctioned permanent posts will be taken into consideration while granting selection grade.
The learned Courts below have concluded that total cadre strength i.e permanent as well as all the temporary posts have to be taken into consideration irrespective of the period of the existence of the temporary posts, for granting selection grade.
Identical question arose before this Court in Ram Nath Chandok and others v. State of Punjab and others, 1986(2) SLJ 41, wherein it was held that 15% quota for selection grade is to be considered on the strength of actually employed and working teachers and not on the basis of permanent posts only.
The above view was affirmed by a Division Bench of this Court in "The State of Punjab and others v. Hira Lal and others," LPA No. 135 of 1986 decided on 1511990.
Still another Division Bench of this Court in Kailash Chander and others v. State of Haryana and another, C.W.P.
No. 16879 of 1991 decided on April 2, 1992 held that selection grade is admissible on total cadre strength.
9.
In view of the above recent authoritative pronouncements of this Courts, I fully agree with the findings returned by two courts below to the effect that the total cadre strength will be taken into consideration while granting selection grade.
10.
Now the second important question which arose as a consequence of the re-organisation of the Districts and transfer of the teachers from one District to another was as to how the seniority had to be fixed.
Following two points will have to be determined :-  (a) What was the criteria to determine the inter se seniority ?
and  (b) What will be the effect of the re-organisation of districts on their seniority ?
Admittedly, the service of the teachers is governed by the Punjab Educational Service, Class-III, School Cadre Rules, 1955, (hereinafter referred to as 'the rules'), and Rule 11 deals with the fixation of the inter se seniority.
Therefore, in accordance with the said rules, the learned courts below have rightly held that the seniority is to be fixed on the basis of the continuous length of service i.e. a person joining first would be senior than the person joining later.
11.
Now on to the question as to what will be the effect of the re- organisation of the Districts and transfers of the teachers from one District to another on their inter se seniority.
Identical question arose before a Single Bench of this Court in Mohan Lal Bhanbu and others v. State of Haryana, 1986(1) S.L.R.
463.
In that case JBT/CAV teachers in the erstwhile State of Punjab Re-organisation Act, 1966 were as a result of their appeals to the Government of India allocated to the State of Haryana.
The names of the petitioners respectively appear at Nos. 65, 73 and 101 of the list mentioned in this order.
Subsequent to this allocation to the State of Haryana, their seniority had concededly been determined at the tail end of the list of teachers of their category of District Hissar as it was at that time.
As a result of the reorganisation of the District, the petitioners were posted in Sirsa District.
Their grouse was that their seniority could not be disturbed as a result of the above-noted allocation from Punjab to Haryana and it has to be determined in accordance with the rules known as The Punjab Educational Service Class III, School Cadre Rules, 1955.
12.
In the above case the authorities sought to justify their action in placing the petitioners at the tail end of the seniority list of the teachers of district Hissar/Sirsa in the light of government instructions which reads as under :-  "Copy of letter No. 1600-Edu-II (U.T.
)-69/ 11541, dated 9569 from the Secretary of Government Haryana, Education Department to the Director, Public Instruction, Haryana, Chandigarh.
***  Subject : Determination of seniority of JBT and CAV teachers, consequent upon the change of final allocation from Punjab to Haryana State.
***  Reference your Memo No. 46-E-III (95)-6931/4E-II, dated 17369 on the subject noted above.
Consequent upon the change of final allocation from Punjab and Himachal Pradesh to the State of Haryana, the seniority of JBT and CAV teachers transferred to Haryana is to be fixed in the district of their choice at the tail end in the seniority list of that district."
These instructions were assailed on the grounds :-  (i) that these instructions having been issued on May 9, 1969 could not possibly operate retrospectively and effect the seniority or status of the petitioners who were allocated to the State of Haryana on November 22, 1968;  (ii) that these instructions cannot have the status of the Government instructions as these do not reflect any decision of the Government taken in this regard; and  (iii) that these instructions could not possibly override or be derogatory to the Act itself which does not lay down anywhere that an employee on an allocation to a particular State, as a result of the Act, would lose his seniority in any manner.
13.
In the above circumstances, it was held that the action of the respondent authorities in not granting the petitioners due seniority in accordance with the rules deserved to be quashed.
14.
In the above view of the matter, the learned first appellate Court has rightly held that the seniority of the petitioners is to be determined in accordance with the Rules.
15.
I also agree with the lower appellate court in coming to the conclusion that the selection grade is admissible on total cadre strength and if some teachers have been transferred to some other districts then they do not carry the posts with them.
Similarly the teachers who have joined in district Mahendergarh will get selection grade according to their seniority.
If some teachers getting selection grade on joining new district rank junior and do not get selection grade in that district, their pay will be protected.
16.
As a sequel to the above discussion, no fault can be found with the well reasoned judgment of the lower appellate Court which is impugned in these Regular Second Appeals and the same is hereby affirmed.
17.
Consequently, these Regular Second Appeals are hereby dismissed.
However, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Appeal dismissed.