NK Kapoor, J - This appeal is directed against the judgment dated 26111991 delivered by JL Gupta, J by which claim of the respondent to be appointed to the post of Assistant Grade-III was allowed.
2.
Before examining the points canvassed by the learned counsel for the appellants it would be appropriate to briefly notice the broad facts leading to the present controversy.
3.
49 candidates were selected for the posts of Assistant Grade-III (D) in the Food Corporation of India to be posted in different districts in the States of Punjab and Haryana.
Offer of appointment issued to the successful candidates is dated 23rd November, 1985.
Pursuant to the offer of appointment, the candidates were asked to report for duty to the concerned District Manager by 24th December, 1985.
Before the candidates could report for duty, the respondent-Food Corporation of India, Regional Office, Haryana, issued telegrams cancelling their appointment orders.
The telegram is dated 4th December, 1985 (Annexure P4).
Feeling aggrieved by this order of cancellation, one Shri Ashok Kumar Sangwan challenged the same by filing a writ petition bearing number C.W.P.
188 of 1986, which was dismissed by the learned Single Judge on 13th February, 1989.
In letters patent appeal the order of the learned Single Judge was set aside and the relief sought by the petitioner was granted vide order dated 5th February, 1990.
This order of the Letters Patent Bench was challenged by the Food Corporation of India by filing a Special Leave Petition before the Supreme Court, which was dismissed on 18th February, 1991.
Accordingly, Ashok Kumar Sangwan was given employment.
4.
Present petitioner, taking a cue from the decision of the Letters Patent Appeal in Ashok Kumar Sangwan's case, which decision had been affirmed by the Apex Court, filed a petition claiming identical relief.
The claim was fortified with the assertion that as per selection list, Ashok Kumar Sangwan was at No. 11, whereas the petitioner was at No. 5.
Since the persons junior to the petitioner had already been given employment, respondent-Food Corporation of India was duty bound to grant the petitioner identical relief, which was being sought by him.
5.
The matter came up finally before the Court on 26th November, 1991, and seeing the merit in the claim of the petitioner, the same was allowed.
However, it was made clear that the petitioner would not be entitled to any seniority or arrears of salary on the basis of this appointment over the persons who have already joined.
6.
The main challenge of the learned counsel for the appellants to the decision of the learned Single Judge is that the claim of the petitioner was highly belated.
According to him, the appointment letter was issued on 23rd November, 1985.
Thus a cause of action, if at all, accrued to the petitioner on its withdrawal, i.e. 4th December, 1985, and at best the petition could be filed within a period of three months, as per Article 58 of the Limitation Act.
Support was sought from the decisions reported as Jagjit Rai Vohra and others v. The State of Haryana and others, 1974 (2) S.L.R.
27; Kuldip Kaur v. State of Punjab and others, 1980 (2) S.L.R.
609; and Shri SP Kapur and others v. The State of Haryana and another, 1989(1) R.S.J 201.
In addition thereto, it was further urged that another petition filed by one Relu Ram (C.W.P.
No. 6544 of 1991) was dismissed on the ground of gross delay and laches.
Justifying the appointment of Ashok Kumar Sangwan, it was urged that the same was in consequence of the orders of the Court and so does not give any fresh cause of action to the petitioner.
7.
Counsel for the respondent in support of the decision of the learned Single Judge urged that there is no period prescribed for invoking the jurisdiction of this Court under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, and the matter has to be examined in the light of the facts and circumstances of each case.
Elaborating, the counsel urged that the present case has some peculiar facts.
Despite the alleged withdrawal of the offer made on 23rd November, 1985, some of the candidates joined the Corporation, and the respondent did not take any step against cancelling their appointment or relieving them.
Ashok Kumar Sangwan, who was at No. 11 in the merit list, whereas the petitioner was admittedly at No. 5, successfully challenged the order of cancellation.
This being the position, the petitioner could not be discriminated and her claim has rightly been allowed by the learned Single Judge.
Otherwise too, since the matter has been examined by the Court in its merits, a mere technical objection of limitation should not be so construed as to deprive the respondent of her right to livelihood.
8.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at a considerable length and perused the relevant material referred to by them during the course of their arguments.
Factual aspects are not in dispute.
It is also not denied that Ashok Kumar Sangwan, who is junior to the petitioner, has been allowed to join, though on the basis of the decision of this Court.
One cannot lose sight of the fact that persons junior to the petitioner either happened to join or were allowed to join pursuant to the direction of this Court.
To deny a person, who, as per merit list, is more meritorious than the persons who are already in employment of the appellant-Corporation, would per se be clearly violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
In fact, learned counsel for the appellants neither challenged the assertions made by the learned counsel for the respondent nor addressed us in this regard.
Thus, the only point which needs some close consideration is whether the delay in invoking the jurisdiction of this Court is fatal to the legitimate claim of the respondent.
We have examined the judgments referred to by the learned counsel for the appellants in this regard.
There is no denying the fact that delay in invoking the jurisdiction of the Court cannot certainly be overlooked, but all the same each case has to be examined keeping in view the fact whether a particular petitioner is or is not entitled to the relief claimed.
All of these judgments have expressed in no uncertain terms that there is no period of limitation prescribed to invoke the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
To deprive the petitioner of her legitimate rights, though claimed after a considerable time, would indeed be too harsh in the facts and circumstances of the present case.
In fact, the learned Single Judge has taken care of this and rightly declined the respondents' claim to seniority as well as arrears of salary etc.
Even otherwise, there is no inordinate delay in filing the petition if it be taken that fresh cause of action accrued to claim identical relief when person junior to the respondent, namely, Ashok Kumar Sangwan's appeal was allowed by the Letters Patent Bench on 5th February, 1990 or when the appellants' Special Leave Petition was dismissed on 18th February, 1991.
Thus, taking a cumulative view of the matter, we find no merit in this plea of the appellant that respondent's petition is liable to be dismissed on the ground of delay.
No other point has been pressed by the appellants.
Resultantly, we find no merit in this appeal, and, consequently, dismiss the same.
No order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.