VK Bali, J - This order shall dispose of two writ petitions bearing No. 7240 of 1988 (The Jorki Andewali Cooperative Agricultural Society Ltd v. The Presiding Officer, Labour Court and another, 1994(3) S.C.T.
391, and 10381 of 1988 (Pritam Singh v. The Presiding Officer, Labour Court Bhatinda and another, as common questions of law and fact are involved therein.
2.
Petitioner-Co-operative Agricultural Society, aggrieved of Award, Annexure P-2, dated May 27, 1988 rendered by the Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Bhatinda, has filed this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India with an obvious prayer to set aside the Award mentioned above.
3.
Respondent-workman was employed as Secretary with petitioner-Management on salary of Rs, 525/- per month.
He remained so employed for a period of ten years but was asked to quit his job vide order dated September 10, 1983.
It was mainly pleaded before the Labour Court that the sack orders were without notice, charge-sheet, enquiry or for that matter even without compliance of pre-requisites of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
The matter was contested by the Management by pleading that the workman was first discharged for participating in an illegal strike on June 3, 1981 but was re- employed in conciliation proceedings on April 1, 1983 whereafter resolution was passed by the Management discharging him from service on May 1, 1983.
The workman obtained stay against the order aforesaid in a suit instituted by him before the Civil Court and after the suit was dismissed as withdrawn, he has finally asked to quit on September 10, 1983 on the grounds of participating in illegal strike and committing embezzlement and other misconduct.
Inasmuch as the sack orders passed by the management were on the ground that he was embezzled the amount and committed other irregularities, it was necessary to hold him guilty in a domestic enquiry that was to ensue.
Nothing of the kind was done and without issuing any notice or charge-sheet or holding any enquiry against him, petitioner was shown the door.
The Labour Court on the findings that retrenchment of the workman was without following any procedure and, thus was illegal, reinstated him in service but declined him the back wages.
In Civil Writ Petition No. 7240 of 1988 it is the order of Labour Court which is sought to be set aside whereas in the connected writ filed by the workman, the prayer is to modify the Award so as to allow him the back wages from the date he was asked to quit.
4.
Mr. Dogra, learned counsel for the petitioner-Management (in C.W.P.
No. 7240 of 1988) contends that inasmuch as respondent workman before seeking reference under Section 10(1)(c) of the Industrial Disputes Act and getting the matter determined from the Labour Court, had gone to the Civil Court by way of civil suit, which was ultimately dismissed as withdrawn, the Labour Court had no choice but for to answer the reference against him as the workman, out of two remedies available to him, one by invoking the jurisdiction of Civil Court and the other by getting the matter adjudicated by the Labour Court, had chosen to go to the Civil Court and, therefore, alternative remedy was not available to him.
There is no substance in the contention of the learned counsel as it is made out from the records of the case that the civil suit was filed by the workman on May 10, 1983 and the same was dismissed as withdrawn on March 20, 1984 with permission to file fresh on the same cause of action.
There was, thus no determination of the rights of workman on merits of the case.
Further, even the suit was withdrawn with permission to file fresh on the same cause of action.
Thus, it is clear that out of the two remedies available to him, the workman had availed only one.
5.
Mr. Dogra further contends that the respondent was not a workman as he was Secretary with the petitioner-Management and in that capacity he was discharging managerial duties.
I am afraid, this question cannot be permitted to be raised as no such plea was ever taken before the Labour Court and the decision of the same is not dependant upon designation of the workman but on the other hand it is dependent upon the nature of duties carried out by him which is every case is a question of fact.
6.
The last submission of Mr. Dogra is that since there was considerable delay in making demand notice, the workman was not entitled to any relief whatsoever.
This submission of the learned counsel is devoid of merit.
Respondent-workman bona fide contested the matter before the civil Court from May 19, 1983 to March 20, 1984.
It was on August 12, 1986 that he served demand notice on the petitioner-Management and thereafter the matter was referred to the Labour Court by the Government under Section 19(1)(c) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
There is no doubt that there has been delay in making demand notice which delay was even from the date of dismissal of the suit and was given after a period of about two years and six months.
This, at the most, would disentitle the petitioner for backwages.
7.
In the petition instituted by the workman, Mr. Hemant Gupta, Advocate, submits that on account of delay in making demand notice, workman could not be denied wages of the entire period and at the most from August, 1986, when he actually made demand notice, wages should have been paid to him.
There is considerable, merit in the contention of learned counsel, inasmuch as the delay, if taken into consideration, is to be the one prior to making of the demand notice and it is for that period that the wages can be withheld.
For the reasons recorded above, Civil Writ Petition No. 10381 of 1988 of the workman is, thus, partly allowed and it is ordered that he shall be entitled to backwages from August 12, 1986.
The writ petition No. 7240 of 1988 instituted by the Management is dismissed.
Parties, in both the cases, are left to bear their own costs.