GC Garg, J - This revision is directed against the orders dated September 7, 1991 and July 30, 1992 of the executing Court and the appellate court respectively.
2.
Hazura Singh, Sub Inspector, respondent herein filed a suit for declaration to the effect that he is entitled to cross efficiency bar with effect from April 1, 1973 or in the alternative from July 1, 1974 and all the arrears and benefits of his revised pay and increments etc. and that he be declared to have been promoted to the next rank from the date the persons junior to him were promoted.
The suit was decreed in favour of the respondent by judgment and decree dated May 26, 1987.
It was held that the respondent was entitled to the benefit of efficiency bar and the payment of all arrears of pay and allowances etc. As regards the promotion of the respondent, it was directed that the promotion of the respondent, it was directed that since he has been allowed the benefit of crossing the efficiency bar, the petitioners will reconsider his case for promotion.
This judgment and decree became final.
The respondent was paid the arrears of pay etc. in respect of crossing of efficiency bar and there is no dispute in that behalf.
3.
Plaintiff-respondent took out execution of the decree in which the stand taken by the petitioner judgment-debtors was that pecuniary benefits that flowed from the decree had been granted and payment actually made to the respondent.
Regarding consideration of case of the respondent for promotion as Sub Inspector and further promotion to higher ranks, the stand taken was that the decree to this extent could not be satisfied as the character rolls and confidential personal file of the respondent which were submitted in the court during trial was still lying there and had not been received back.
It was further submitted that the aforesaid documents had however been received from the Court on October 22, 1988 and the case of the respondent for confirmation in the rank of Sub Inspector and for further promotion to higher rank was being considered.
It was prayed on behalf of the petitioners that some time more be granted for the purpose and till then further proceedings in the execution be stayed.
4.
During the pendency of the execution proceedings, the executing Court received a letter from the Director General of Police, Punjab intimating that the case of the respondent for confirmation in the rank of Sub Inspector and further promotion to higher ranks from April 1, 1974 had been considered but the respondent was not found fit for promotion due to consistent chequered record of service.
Copy of such order is, however, not available on the record.
5.
In the above backdrop, the executing court framed the following issues :  1- Whether the decree passed has been fully satisfied ?
If so its effect ?
OP JDs.
2- Relief  6.
The executing Court after appreciating the evidence led before it observed that there was nothing on the file as to whether there was any other record beyond the record already produced and examined by the court before passing the decree under execution and when the entire record of the decree-holder had already been considered and examined by the court before passing the decree, it could not be made the basis for reconsidering the case of the decree-holder for confirmation and promotion as the judgment-debtors could not sit over the judgment of the court.
The executing Court further observed that there was only a copy of the order passed by the Director General of Police, Punjab which had even not been exhibited and in the absence of which the said order could not be treated to have been proved according to the provisions of the Evidence Act.
The executing Court after referring to various judicial pronouncements on the other hand, concluded that the decree granted in favour of the respondent had not been fully satisfied and the order passed by the Director General of Police, Punjab was bad in law and against the spirit of the decree.
Ultimately, the executing Court ordered issuance of warrants of attachment.
7.
It may also be noticed that during the course of its judgment, learned executing Court also concluded that "in these circumstances, I am of the considered view that the decree-holder is definitely entitled to confirmation w.e.f.
1.4.1974 and further promotion on due dates to next higher ranks from 141974 to 1983 and the order No. 65/E-1 dated 2.1.1989 passed by the Director General of Police, Punjab rejecting the case of the decree-holder for confirmation and promotion as per direction of the courts absolutely illegal and not binding on the decree-holder."
8.
Though no appeal lay against the said order yet an appeal was filed which ultimately was dismissed by learned Addl.
District Judge.
This is how the present revision came to be filed by the State of Punjab and others against both the order of the exceuting court as also the one passed by the appellate court.
9.
Learned counsel for the petitioners vehemently contended that the executing Court has acted illegally.
The precise contention is that the executing Court has granted a relief which was not even granted by the court granting the decree.
He thus submitted that the executing Court has not only acted illegally but has also gone behind the decree in granting the relief to the respondent which was not available to him.
10.
During the course of hearing, learned counsel for the respondent, finding that he was unable to support the order passed by the executing Court, took a somersault and prayed that he had no objection if the order of the executing court was set aside.
However, he prayed that a direction be given to the Director General of Police, Punjab to consider the case of the decree-holder for promotion from the due dates to the rank Sub Inspector and above in terms of the decree passed by the civil court, by passing a speaking order and thereafter granted the respondent such benefits as he may be found entitled to in law.
In the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case, I am of the view that the request of the counsel for the decree-holder is most appropriate and deserves to be granted.
11.
There is nothing on the record of this case to show that in fact any order, what to talk of a speaking order was ever passed by the Director General of Police, Punjab considering the case of the respondent for promotion to the rank of Sub Inspector and above.
What is available on the record is only a communication showing that the decree-holder was not found fit for promotion.
Learned counsel for the petitioners was even unable to produce any such order of the Director General of Police showing consideration of case of the respondent for promotion in terms of the decree passed by the civil court.
In other words, it means that there is nothing on the record to show that the case of the respondent was considered for promotion.
Therefore, the decree has not been complied with till today.
For the fair stand taken by the learned counsel for the respondent-decree holder and in the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case, the petitioner-judgment-debtors are directed to consider the claim of the respondent for promotion in terms of the decree dated May 26, 1987 passed by the civil court in accordance with law within three months from the date of receipt by the Director General of Police, Punjab a copy of this order and pass an appropriate speaking order with detailed reasoning.
A copy of such order that may be passed by the petitioner-authorities in this behalf shall be communicated to the respondent-decree holder forthwith through registered post and if the respondent is found entitled to promotions and other pecuniary benefits, the same shall be released to him according to law within three months of the passing of such order.
Consequently, the order dated September 7, 1991 passed by the executing Court and order dated July 30, 1992 passed by the appellate court are set aside and the revision is disposed of with the directions aforesaid.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.