V K Bali, J - Appellant Punjab State Electricity Board in present appeal filed against Satpal Singh respondent has challenged the judgment and decree passed by the trial Court which was affirmed by the first appellate Court vide which suit brought about by plaintiff Satpal Singh seeking declaration to the effect that the show-cause notice dated 2471986 and order terminating his service dated 3091986 was illegal and decreed.
2.
Brief facts of the case reveal that Sat Pal Singh (hereinafter referred to as the plaintiff) joined the Punjab State Electricity Board as Meter Reader with effect from 27.10.1978 on regular basis.
He applied for five days leave from 2571983 which was sanctioned.
However, after the expiry of the leave he did not report and was thus issued letters on 581983, 681983 and 591983 to assume his duties which he was neglecting being on unauthorised leave.
All the notices sent to him were returned back with the report that he had gone abroad.
The plaintiff was charge-sheeted on 2631984.
When there was no response even to the charge-sheet issued to him on 1631985, a public notice was given in four widely circulated newspapers and when that also did not yield any result, on 1291985 an Enquiry Officer was appointed to go into the matter and find out as to whether the plaintiff was on unauthorised leave.
The Enquiry Officer issued letter to the plaintiff on 1431986 to appear before him, which too was returned with the endorsement that he ad gone abroad.
Fresh notice was issued on 2471986 and yet another notice was issued on 3091986.
The plaintiff did not respond to any of the notices as referred to above and thereafter taking into account the long absence of the plaintiff without even intimating the office, leaving aside getting the leave sanctioned, his services were terminated on September 30, 1986.
It is this order as referred to above, which was basically challenged in the civil suit with the result as indicated in the earlier part of the judgment.
3.
The learned trial Court on the evidence led before it came to the conclusion that it was admitted by the witnesses appearing on behalf of the appellant that no communication was sent to the plaintiff on any other address.
It was also found as per admission on DW-1 that the house of the;plaintiff was situated in village Rahon but the witness could not state as to since when the plaintiff was residing at the said address.
A finding was given on the strength of the aforesaid evidence that the appellant did not make any effort to serve notice at the address of the plaintiff at Rahon.
The trial Court invalidated the order of termination on yet another ground i.e. the first notice was issued by Shri SK Sandhu, S.D.O.
Punjab State Electricity Board, whereas the Superintending Engineer, Nawanshahar was the appointing authority of the plaintiff.
The matter was agitated in appeal and the first appellant Court being not impressed with any of the ground taken by the trial Court did not comment anything on such ground yet upheld the judgment and decree passed by the trial Court on the solitary ground that procedure as contained in Rules 8 and 9 of the Punishment and Appeal Rules, 1970, was not followed by the Appointing authority.
Earlier, on the question of fact, a firm finding was recorded by the appellate Court that plaintiff was not prevented to join the duties due to illness, rather he did not join the duties intentionally.
It was also observed that on assumption that the plaintiff has gone abroad even though this fact was not proved by any other evidence.
It was also held that the appellant got published proclamation in the newspaper and the plaintiff did not joint the duties nor he contested show-cause notice issued by the appellant.
4.
The learned Counsel for the parties have taken me through the evidence and particularly the statement of DW.1 on whose admission it was held that the plaintiff was not served at the changed address.
No such statement was made by the witness concerned.
If during the pendency of the case before the lower appellate Court the witness had come to know that plaintiff was residing at Rahon, it could not mean that the witness or the department knew during the pendency of the enquiry against the plaintiff that he had changed his address.
Nothing at all was proved on the record of the case to show that the plaintiff had actually changed his place of residence and that he had shifted to another place than the one which was given in the office at the time of his appointment.
No arguments were addressed on behalf of the plaintiff that the first notice was issued by an authority which was incompetent to do so obviously for the reason that the subsequent notices and which were many, were given by the competent authority.
The only question that, thus, arises in the present case is as to whether the procedure of giving a charge-sheet and opportunity of cross-examining the witnesses produced in the course of enquiry as enshrined in Rules 8 and 9 of the Punishment and Appeal Rules is necessarily to he followed even though all efforts of the department to secure presence of the plaintiff had proved aborted.
5.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and going through the record of the case, this Court is of the considered view that such a procedure is to be followed only if the delinquent official is available.
In a situation as is available in the present case, the person proceeded departmentally makes himself unavailable and all efforts to secure his presence by issuing repeated letters, show-cause notice, publication in the newspapers, remain unsuccessful, there cannot be any occasion for the department to follow the procedure contained in Rules 8 and 9 of the Punishment and Appeal Rules.
The procedure in the very nature of things can be followed only if the person concerned is available.
The learned appellate Court, thus, clearly erred while invalidation the order of dismissal on the solitary ground that procedure prescribed in Rules 8 and 9 of the Punishment and Appeal Rules has not been followed.
The judgment and decree passed by the trial Court and affirmed by the appellate Court decreeing the suit of the plaintiff, thus, cannot be sustained.
That being so, the present appeal is allowed.
The judgment and decree passed by the trial Court and affirmed by the first appellate Court is set aside and the suit of the plaintiff is dismissed.
However, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Appeal allowed.