RS Mongia, J - The petitioner while working with the respondent-State Bank of Patiala as Manager 'B' class was placed under suspension on 2981961 as a departmental enquiry was contemplated against him.
After the departmental enquiry the petitioner was reverted to the post of Clerk vide order dated 2461963.
This order of reversion was challenged by the petitioner by way of a civil suit in the Court of Sub Judge Ist Class, Patiala for declaration that the said order was illegal, ultra vires, unconstitutional, null and avoid and that the petitioner continued to be in service of the Bank as Manager 'B' class with all consequential benefits.
Learned sub Judge vide judgment dated 18111968 decreed the suit of the petitioner holding the order of reversion to be invalid.
The First Appeal, Second Appeal and the LPA filed by the Bank against the judgment and decree of & trial Court were dismissed and the judgment of the trial Court was upheld.
Consequently, on 2721971 the petitioner was restored to the position as Manager 'B' grade w.e.f.
2461993 the position the petitioner enjoyed before the order of reversion was passed.
He was also paid the arrears of his salary etc.
Thereafter, the petitioner retired from the service of the Bank on 561971 on attaining the age of 58 years.
2.
Since according to the petitioner, a part of the decree of the trial Court regarding consequential benefits like promotion to the higher ranks from the dates his juniors had been promoted, had not been implemented.
Petitioner filed a civil writ petition (No. 1701 of 1977) in this Court for directing the respondent-Bank to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion to the higher ranks w.e.f.
the dates his juniors were promoted.
The petition was allowed by the learned Single Judge of this court on 13.9.1983 and the respondent Bank was directed to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion after 2981961 (the date on which petitioner was put under suspension) w.e.f.
the date his juniors were promoted with consequential benefits.
In pursuance of the abovesaid judgment, the Bank considered the case of the petitioner and passed the following order on 1521982, relevant portion of which reads as under :-  "Resolved that Shri Balbir Singh, Ex-Officer of the Bank is entitled to promotion to the erstwhile 'B' Grade only with effect from the 1st November, 1965 and he be paid salary and allowances etc. after making his fitment in the said grades/scales applicable from time to time.
Further resolved that Shri Balbir Singh was not considered entitled for promotion to erstwhile 'A' Grade on merits.
Pursuant to the aforesaid orders, a sum of Rs. 1254/- detailed in below is payable to you for which a Bank draft No. 532536 dated 1421984 is enclosed in full and final satisfaction from 1111965 to 10.10.1971."
The petitioner has impugned the abovesaid decision of the Bank in the present writ petition.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the case of the petitioner had not been properly considered with retrospective effect for promotion to the higher ranks as persons with interior record were promoted who were admittedly junior of the petitioner and the petitioner had been ignored for promotion arbitrarily.
Further, the petitioner's counsel argued that at the time of his demotion on 2461963, the petitioner was working as Manager 'B' Grade and in fact he was also restored the same position after the suit was decreed and he was reinstated as Manager 'B' Grade.
However, the Bank had illegally treated the petitioner as Manager 'C' Grade with effect from the date he was demoted and considered his case for promotion to Manager 'B' Grade though, he already held that rank on the date of his demotion.
4.
On 1011994 during the course of arguments, I considered it appropriate to peruse the record of the Bank, where the petitioner's case was considered for retrospective.
promotion.
I passed an order directing the Bank to produce the record.
By way of a miscellaneous application (CM 408 of 1994) the Bank has placed on record of his case a copy of the report pertaining to consideration of the petitioner's case for retrospective promotion.
The same has been annexed as Annexure R-3 with the application.
It is mentioned in Annexure R-3 that the General Manager (Operations) constituted a committee of the following officers namely :-  (i) Assistant General Manager, Patiala (Head of the Committee)  (ii) Chief Law Officer  (iii) Special Officer, Disciplinary Action Cell,  for considering the case of the petitioner for retrospective promotion.
It has been noticed that the revision of grades of Clerks and Officers had taken place w.e.f.
1.1.1962 when the then 'B' Grade was integrated into 'C' Grade and all officers, who were then in 'B' Grade, like the petitioner, were placed in 'C' Grade.
Consequently the petitioner's case was first considered for promotion from 'C' Grade to 'B' Grade with effect from the date any of his juniors was promoted during the period starting from the suspension of the petitioner i.e. 2981961.
It was further noticed that from 2981961 to 3131963, no officer junior to him was promoted from 'C' Grade to 'B' Grade.
The first promotion of a junior person then the petitioner from 'C' Grade to 'B' Grade had taken place w.e.f.
141963.
The service record of the petitioner was compared with those officers, who were promoted to 'C' Grade to 'B' Grade w.e.f.
141963 to 1111965 and it was observed that the petitioner had comparable record with a couples of officers.
The criteria for promotion from 'C' Grade to 'B' Grade was :-  (i) An officer should have a consistently good record of service;  (ii) An officer must have passed atleast Part-I of Indian Institute of Bankers Examination.
Applying the abovesaid criteria, it was found that all Officers excepting S/Shri GS Dhillon, Yog Raj Walia and Balwant Singh had passed atleast part-I of the Indian Institute of Bankers Examination.
The above three officers and the petitioner had not passed the said examination.
Therefore, other officers were considered better than the petitioner.
As far as Shri GS Dhillon was concerned he was a Graduate and had consistently good record of service and in his case the condition of passing of the banking examination was relaxed.
Shri GS Dhillon was considered to have better record as compared to the petitioner as the petitioner had been warned several times while being in the service of the Bank.
As far as Yog Rai Walia and Balwant Singh are concerned, they were considered to have comparable record with the petitioner and in their case the condition of passing the Bank examination was relaxed.
It was considered that the petitioner was entitled to promotion to 'B' Grade from 1111965, the date when S/Shri Yog Raj Walia and Balwant Singh were promoted.
5.
Thereafter the petitioner's case was considered for promotion from 'B' Grade to 'A' Grade after 1111985, when any of his juniors was promoted from 'B' Grade to 'A' Grade.
From the record, I find that none of the juniors to the petitioner in Grade 'B' was promoted to Grade 'A' till the date of his retirement.
The petitioner was found not to be having comparable record with those persons who were promoted to Grade 'A' but were junior to petitioner in Grade 'C'.
As observed above, in 'B' Grade, the petitioner ranked senior to S/Sh.
Yog Raj Walia and Balwant Singh by virtue of his promotion w.e.f.
1111965.
None of these two persons were promoted to grade 'A' till the petitioner retired.
6.
Learned counsel for the respondent-Bank on the basis of the above record submitted that the petitioner's case had been duly considered.
He was promoted to 'B' Grade w.e.f.
1111965 and as not found fit for promotion to 'A' Grade.
All officers including the petitioner who were in the erstwhile 'B' Grade were placed in 'C' Grade on revision of pay scales w.e.f.
1.1.1962 and their cases were considered for promotion from 'C' grade to 'B' Grade.
Further, it was submitted by the learned counsel that the petitioner had been paid the arrears of pay of 'C' Grade from 2461963 to 31.10.1965 and from 1111965 to his date of retirement as 'B' Grade officer.
In fact, according to the learned counsel, the petitioner had filed an execution application in the Court of Sub Judge at Patiala and in obedience of the order of the Court Rs. 22,83886 was disbursed to the petitioner on 991988 and nothing more is payable.
7.
After bearing counsel for the parties and persuing the record, to which reference has been made above, I find that the petitioner was duly considered for promotion to higher grades with effect from the date his juniors were promoted and detailed order was passed to that effect by the Committee constituted for that purpose, which was duly approved by the competent authority.
The petitioner had only a right of consideration for promotion to higher grades with effect from the dates his juniors were promoted and as observed above, petitioner's case had been considered in accordance with law and I find no fault with the consideration by the Bank regarding the case of promotion of the petitioner.
Further as per the order of the executing Court, the petitioner has been paid the arrears and interest.
For the foregoing reasons, I find no merit in this petition, which is dismissed.
However, I make no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.