VK Bali, J (Oral) - Prayer in this petition filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India is to issue writ in the nature of mandamus directing respondent-Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education & Research, Chandigarh (hereinafter to be referred to as PGI) to put the petitioners in the pay scale of Rs. 1400-2300/- on the principal of equal pay for equal work.
2.
The facts, as given in the petition reveal that whereas, petitioner No. 1 was appointed as Clerk in the year 1983, petitioner No. 2 was appointed as such on March 29, 1982 in the respondent Institute.
Vide order dated June 9, 1988, both of them were promoted on the recommendations of the Departmental Promotion-cum-Selection Committee as Store-keepers in the pay scale of Rs. 1200-2040/- (Central Scale).
Some of the store-keepers who were promoted by respondent Institute were given scale of Rs. 330-560/- which was revised to Rs. 1200-2040/- The said Store-keepers after their promotion challenged the action of respondent PGI of fixing them in the pay scale of Rs. 1200-2040/- instead of Rs. 1400-2300/- as the said pay scale of Rs. 1400-2300/- was being paid to the Store-keepers working in the All India Medical Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi.
It is pleaded that as per Rule 40 of the Post- Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, 1967, the Central Staff Service Rules have been made applicable to the employees of the respondent-PGI and therefore the Statutory Finance Committee in its meeting held on September 20, 1975 decided that all future recruitments/promotions shall be made in the pay scales admissible in all India Medical Institute of Sciences, New Delhi.
Thus, on the basis of various decisions and to equate the petitioners with the employees working in the All India Medical Institute of Sciences, New Delhi, cogent evidence was produced before the learned Sub Judge, dealing with the civil suit of others who, in turn, decided the controversy in favour of plaintiffs on May 9, 1989 holding thereby that the Store-keepers are entitled to pay scale of Rs. 425-600/- which was revised to Rs. 1400-2300/-.
A copy of the said judgment has been placed on the records of this case as Annexure P-2.
Aggrieved PGI carried an appeal against the judgment and decree passed by the trial Court which was, however, dismissed as withdrawn on May 23, 1991 from the court of Shri BR Gupta, the then Additional District Judge, Chandigarh where it was pending.
The Store-keepers, after the withdrawal of the appeal, referred to above, thus, started getting pay scale of Rs. 1400-2300/-.
But the petitioners were denied the same on the plea that they were not party to the civil suit.
They, thus, made representation to the PGI for the grant of scale equivalent to one which was being granted to their counter-parts i.e. of Rs. 1400-2300/-.
When the entreaties of petitioners fell on deaf ears, they were left with no choice but to file Civil Writ Petition No. 4259 of 1992 which came up for hearing before a Division Bench on April 1, 1992, when the following order was passed :-  "This writ petition is disposed of with liberty to the petitioners to file a fresh representation seeking relief as claimed in this writ petition.
The petitioners are given 15 days, time from today for making such representation.
Let the representation be decided within three months of the receipt of such representation by the respondent."
Petitioners thus, filed a representation but the same was not decided within the stipulated time constraining them to serve legal notice through their counsel on July 14, 1992.
A demand was made to decide the matter in compliance with the orders passed by this Court.
It was also mentioned in the notice that in case no action was taken, petitioners would be left with no choice but for to file contempt petition but in spite of service of legal notice, when nothing was heard in the matter a contempt petition was actually filed.
In response to the notice having been issued in the contempt petition, the counsel for the PGI informed that the case had already been referred to the Government of India and further action shall be taken on receipt of advice from them.
Later on an information was given to this court that after examining the matter, it was decided not to grant to the petitioners pay scale of Rs. 1400-2300/- as per approved Rules and Regulations of the PGI.
Copy of the order aforesaid has been placed on the records of this case as Annexure P-8.
It is this order, which has been challenged in the present petition and the prayer in consequence of setting aside of the order is to pay to the petitioners pay scale of Rs. 1400-2300/- as mentioned in the earlier part of this judgment.
3.
The only but impressive argument raised by learned counsel appearing on behalf of petitioners is that non-grant of pay scale of Rs. 1400-2300/- to the petitioners.
which pay scale now is being admittedly given to their counter- parts on account of judgment and decree passed by the Civil Court, is not only discriminatory but also offends the principle of,'equal pay for equal work' which has been so strongly entrenched to assume even the character of fundamental right.
4.
The cause of petitioners has been opposed and Mr. Nehra, learned Senior Advocate, appearing on behalf of respondent PGI has sought to defend the action of respondent by contending that the civil court judgment which is the main and the only ground on which equal pay has been asked for by the petitioner is a judgment in personam and, therefore, is not enforceable under any provision of the Evidence Act.
He further contends that the principle of equal pay for equal work cannot be imported in the present case as it was not conscious decision of the PGI to place the counter-parts of petitioners in a particular pay scale and in fact the same was forced upon them by way of the judgment aforesaid.
He also urges that it was the choice of the employer to place a particular employees in a particular pay scale.
For this aforesaid contention, Mr. Nehra relies upon two judgments of Supreme Court in State of UP and others v. JP Chourasia and others, AIR 1989 SC 19 and Umesh Chandra Gupta and others v. Oil and Natural Gas Commission and others, AIR 1989 SC 29.
Learned counsel further contends that the pay scales of the employees of respondent-Institute have been fixed as per Rule 40 of the 1967 Rules.
5.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and going through the records of the case, this Court is, however, of the considered view that the cause of petitioners is meritorious and therefore, this petition must succeed.
It is not disputed that the persons holding the same post, as is held by the petitioners, raked the matter with regard to higher pay scale in the Civil Court.
The said matter was contested before the Civil Court by the PGI on all conceivable grounds that were then available with it.
The issues on which the parties led their evidence resulted into decree in favour of the persons who are holding the same posts.
Aggrieved, respondent PGI filed an appeal which was not taken to its logical end and in fact was dismissed as withdrawn.
The order withdrawing the appeal runs thus.
"Bar is on strike File taken up today as 2251991 was declared holiday because of the death of former Prime Minister.
In view of the statement of learned counsel for the appellants the appeal is dismissed as withdrawn.
This file be consigned to the record room."
The very fact that respondent PGI had withdrawn the appeal is suggestive of the fact that judgment and decree rendered by the Civil Court was conceded to be correct.
It is not disputed that the counter-parts of petitioners started getting enhanced pay scale, as ordered by the Civil Court, only after the appeal was dismissed as withdrawn.
In the face of this argument raised by Mr. Nehra, learned counsel for respondent PGI has no substance whatsoever.
It is not a case where counter-parts of petitioners have been granted higher pay scale on the dint of civil Court judgment but the matter goes further inasmuch as the PGI withdrew the appeal and as mentioned above, in a way, accepted the judgment passed by the Civil Court to be correct.
The very fact of withdrawing the appeal is suggestive of the fact that PGI accepted that the persons, as the petitioners are, should be placed in a particular pay scale as ordered by the civil Court.
Insofar as judgments of the Supreme Court in JP Chaurasia and Umesh Chandra Gupta's case are concerned, the same have no applicability to the facts of the present case.
6.
This court has not gone to the issue but assuming that Rule 40 of the 1967 Rules is applicable and it is in accordance with the said Rule alone that the pay scale of PGI employees are fixed yet the very fact that the counter-parts of petitioners are put in higher pay scale, the principle of 'Equal pay for Equal work' has necessarily to be applied.
7.
For the reasons recorded above, this petition is allowed.
Order, Annexure P-8 which came to be passed after the directions issued by this Court and which is non-speaking and cryptic order without giving any reasons whatsoever, is quashed.
A direction is issued to respondent-PGI to pay to petitioners the pay scale of Rs. 1400-2300/- from June 9, 1988 ie the date from which they were promoted to the post of Store-keeper.
Petitioners shall also be entitled to interest on the arrears of wages @ 10% as, in view of this Court, the stand of respondent PGI to deny higher pay scale to petitioners even after the civil Court decree was passed, is wholly unsustainable and even though this Court issued directions to consider the representation of petitioners which was obviously to be in the light of civil Court judgment, order, Annexure P-8 without giving any reason, was passed, this constraining the petitioners to come to this Court for third time.
Let the directions issued in this order be complied within 30 days from today.
Parties are, however, left to bear their own costs.
8.
Copy of this order be given dasti to learned counsel for the parties under the signatures of the Reader of this Court.
Petition allowed.