Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner is aggrieved by the award of the Labour Court, Jalandhar.
A copy of the award has been produced on record as Annexure P-4.
The Labour Court has declined to go into the dispute between the parties on the ground that in fact the services of the petitioner had been terminated on September 7, 1985 and, therefore, no dispute existed on August 17, 1985.
A few facts may be noticed.
The petitioner avers that he was appointed as an Accountant with the respondent M/s Thakur Dass and Company (respondent No. 2) on June 1, 1979.
It is admitted position between the parties that on August 7, 1985 a notice was given to the petitioner by which he was informed that "the Management had decided to terminate his services w.e.f.
791985 on the ground that you are not able to do the work assigned to you.
Your dues in respect to your salary and others will be settled by the Company on or before 7th of September, 1985."
The petitioner avers that his services were actually terminated on August 17, 1985 and the charge of the cash etc. was taken from him.
Aggrieved by the action of the respondent-company, the petitioner served Notice of Demand dated April 8, 1986 (Annexure P-3).
The Government referred the following dispute for adjudication :  "Whether termination of service of Shri Rakesh Kumar workman, is justified and in order ?
If not, to what relief/exact amount of compensation is he entitled ?"
On the basis of the pleadings of the parties, the learned Labour Court framed the following two issues :-  (i) Whether termination of service of the workman is justified and in order ?
(ii) Relief.
On examination of the material produced on record the Labour Court concluded that "as per what is mentioned therein (the written statement) the services of Rakesh Kumar were dispensed with on 791985 and not on 1881985 as alleged by him and since it has not been refuted by the latter either by way of filing a rejoinder or in the course of his statement made in the Court, the assertions made in this regard by them (respondents) has to be taken to have remained uncontroverted and in this view of the matter, therefore, it has to be said that there was no dispute between them on that date i.e. 1781985 and this in turn has to have the effect of it being said that no reference could have been made on the basis of any such thing which was non-existent at the material point of time...." Accordingly, the Labour Court declined to go into the merits of the controversy.
Aggrieved by this order of the Labour Court, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties.
The factual position is not in dispute.
It is the admitted position that on August 7, 1985, petitioner was given a notice that his services would stand terminated w.e.f.
September 7, 1985.
It is also admitted position that on August 17, 1985, the charge of cash etc. was taken over from him.
A copy of the certificate indicating that the Chief Accountant had received the cash in hand along with the cash book and keys etc., is on record as Annexure P-2.
In this situation, the petitioner was right in asserting that his services were terminated w.e.f.
August 18, 1985.
He had accordingly sought a reference regarding the validity of the termination of the services.
The matter was actually referred by the appropriate Government to the Labour Court.
A perusal of the order of reference shows that the Labour Court had to consider and decide as to whether or not the termination of the services of the workman was justified and in order.
In the order of reference, there was no mention of any particular date.
Even the issues framed by the Labour Court related to the validity of the termination of services of the workman.
There was no issue with regard to the validity of the reference.
In this situation, the order passed by the Labour Court cannot be sustained.
Accordingly, this writ petition is allowed.
The award dated September 17, 1991, a copy of which has been produced on record as Annexure P-4, is set aside.
The case is remitted to the Labour Court, Jalandhar for decision on merits.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.