Harjit Singh Bedi, J - The petitioner appeared in the Pre-Medical Test for admission to the MBBS Course and having secured his merit at No. 247 was put in the waiting list.
On the availability of some of the CBSE seats, the petitioner was allowed admission in the Ist Professional MBBS Course on 29th January, 1990, whereas the regular classes had started in September 1989.
These students appeared in the Ist Professional MBBS Examination in December 1990 but the petitioner was not allowed to appear in the same as he had not completed the academic course of 1-1/2 years as provided by the Ordinance of the Punjabi University, Patiala.
The petitioner accordingly appeared, though on a provisional basis, in June 1991 in the supplementary examination but his result was made subject to the approval of the Academic Council of the University.
The result of the supplementary examination held in June 1991 was declared in the month of August but, as the admission of the petitioner to the examination in question was only provisional subject to the approval of the council, his result was not declared.
This approval was received from the Academic Council vide Punjabi University letter dated 26th November, 1991 and was formally communicated to the petitioner vide Annexure P2 dated 5th December, 1991, and the petitioner was declared to have passed the Ist Professional MBBS Examination.
The 2nd Professional Examination was scheduled to begin on 4th December, 1992 and the petitioner apprehending that he would not be allowed to appear as a period of 1-1/2 years had not elapsed between 5th December, 1991 and 5th December, 1992, as required by Ordinance 15 dealing with the 2nd Professional Examination, filed the present petition and after hearing counsel for the parties, this Court on 3rd December, 1992 directed that the petitioner be allowed to appear in the 2nd Professional MBBS Examination (Supplementary) at his own risk subject to the decision of the writ petition.
Vide orders dated 26th February, 1993, this Court also directed that the petitioner be allowed to attend the classes of the 3rd Professional MBBS Course subject to the result of the petition and it is the conceded case of the parties that the petitioner sat in the 2nd Professional MBBS Examination and cleared some of the papers whereas the others were cancelled on account of the fact that he did not have the requisite 75 per cent lectures.
2.
The case set out by the petitioner in the writ petition as also at the time of arguments addressed by his counsel.
Mr. Deepak Sibal was that the admission of the petitioner had been concededly regularised as far as the 1st Professional MBBS course was concerned, but the inordinate delay caused by the Qcademic Council i.e. between June 1991 up to 5th December, 1991 in arriving at its decision should not be allowed to prejudice as had the decision been taken within a reasonable time, the petitioner would have completed the academic period of 18 months of the course as required by Ordinance 15.
It has also been urged that the University itself had been deviating from applying the provisions of Ordinance 15 by allowing some students to appear in the examination though they had not completed a study period of 1-1/2 years and as such the period so stipulated was not mandatory.
The petitioner has also placed reliance in support of his case on single Bench decisions of this Court in CWP.
No. 9135 of 1992 decided on 1st December, 1992 and CWP No. 10308 of 1992 decided on 18th November, 1992.
3.
The case of the respondents, however, is that the judgments aforecited could not be sustained in view of the decision of the Supreme Court in Council of Homoepathic System of Medicine, Punjab and others v. Suchintan and others, JT 1993(3) SC 727 : 1993(3) SCT.
276 in which their Lordships have held while upsetting a judgment of this Court, that the period of study provided in the Regulations for making a candidate eligible to appear in an examination was sacrosanct.
Reliance has also been placed on a Single Bench decision of this Court in CWP.
No. 2290 of 1991 decided on 361991.
It has also been urged that the Supreme Court in the cited case had held that the question of any equity arising in favour of a student must give way in the presence of a specific regulation and although the student may be entitled to sympathy yet no relief can be granted by the Court in such a situation.
4.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the relevant decisions cited before us.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the aforecited case while considering Regulations 9 to 11 of the Homeopathy (Diploma Course) DHMS Regulations, 1983 which specifically provided for a time gap between one examination and the other, held that where the plain language of a statute admitted of only one interpretation it was incumbent on the court to accept that interpretation and to import any other consideration while taking a decision was not appropriate and as such the time gap fixed by the regulations was mandatory.
It was also held that where the statute itself had to be construed as being mandatory the question of any equity arising in favour of the student was not to be taken note of and the court could not give any relief on that basis.
The argument of the petitioner's counsel that the period of 1-1/2 years was therefore not mandatory and could be ignored by the University is, therefore, in the face of the judgment of the Supreme Court, somewhat untenable.
The two cases of this Court cited by him do not go into the mandatory nature of the Ordinance but were decided on the peculiar facts of those cases.
The judgments cited by the learned counsel for the petitioner, therefore, are not in any way contrary to the decision of the Supreme Court.
We are therefore of the view in the light of the discussion made above that the provisions of Ordinance 15 of the University are mandatory in nature and must be strictly followed while admitting a student to the examination in question.
Having held as above, the question that needs consideration now is what needs to be done on the facts of this case.
It is undoubtedly true that the University itself after having granted admission to the petitioner in January 1990 and allowing him to appear in the supplementary examination in the 1st Professional MBBS course in June, though on provisional basis, did not regularise his admission to the examination till 5th December 1991, that is a period of over five months and during this period he was not entitled to attend classes for the 2nd Professional MBBS Course with the result that he could not complete the 1-1/2 years course or attend 75 per cent lectures.
In view of the above assertions, we are of the view that the petitioner's admission to the 2nd Professional MBBS Course had to be regularised as he has been prejudiced for no fault on his part.
For the reasons recorded above, we allow the writ petition and direct the respondent - University to declare the result of the petitioner of 2nd Professional MBBS Examination (Supplementary) and to regularise his admission in the 3rd Professional MBBS Course.
There will, however, be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly