RP Sethi, J - The petitioner's husband, after rendering 20 years of service as a professor of chemistry in C.G.M.
Science College, Jammu, died on 1791985 when he was only 45 years of age.
He was survived by his wife and three minor female children.
In her claim for the grant of family pension, respondent No. 3 issued an intimation letter dated 1111985 addressed to the Treasury Officer, Addl.
Treasury, Jammu, intimating her that her family pension at the rate of Rs. 49440 and DA @ 581 per month w.e.
from 1891985, had been allowed with a further instruction to her to appear before the Treasury Officer to receive the payment.
Calculating the pension under Rule 20(bb) of the Family Pension-cum-Gratuity Rules, the family pension of the petitioner is likely to be reduced w.e.
from 17.9.1992 when seven years' period is to lapse.
It is submitted that SRO 310 of 1986 dated 851986 provided that the family pension of the defendants of the government servant who die in harness, would be equal to the amount of last pay drawn by the deceased official for the first 7 years and thereafter the family pension was to be paid at the rate of 50% of the pay last drawn or twice the family pension admissible as per Rule 20(ii)(aaa) of the Family Pension-cum-Gratuity Rules, whichever was less, for the next 7 years or till the deceased would have attained the age of 62 years whichever was earlier and thereafter the family pension would be made payable at the ordinary rates laid down in Rule 20(ii)(aaa) of the aforesaid rules.
It has been prayed that the petitioner is entitled to the grant of benefit of SRO-310 of 1986 by quashing the words "These rules shall be deemed to have come into effect from 111986" incorporated in the said SRO.
It is submitted that denial to the petitioner of the grant of benefit was violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
2.
In the reply filed on behalf of the respondents it has been submitted that the petitioner is no entitled to the grant of the benefit of SRO-310 and that her petition being misconceived is liable to be dismissed.
It is submitted that as no fundamental or legal right of the petitioner has been violated she is not entitled to maintain the present petition.
It is contended that as per SRO-310 of 1986, family pension at the rate of last pay drawn by the deceased employee who dies while in service is admissible in service or upto the superannuation of the deceased employee whichever is earlier but it is contended that the petitioner is not entitled to it.
It is further submitted that the doctrine of classification was evolved to sustain a State action designed to help segment of the society in need of succour.
The cut off date i.e. 111986 is claimed to be not arbitrary or devoid of rational consideration.
In fixing the cut-off date the authorities are stated to have not acted mala fide with a view to deprive those who retired before 111986 of the benefit it was not practical to extend the benefit to such employees as UGI scheme became operative i.e. from 111986.
3.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
4.
On 11.3.1993, learned counsel for the parties agreed for disposal of the case at the admission stage.
Vide a detailed order dated 15.7.1992, a direction was issued to respondents 1 to 3 to raise pension of the petitioner in terms of para 2 of SRO-310 of 1986 forthwith upon the petitioner's furnishing an undertaking that in case the petitioner fails in her petition, she will reimburse the amount overdrawn by her.
Learned counsel for the respondents have not seriously contested regarding the maintainability of the writ petition.
Otherwise also, it cannot be said that no fundamental or statutory right is alleged to have been violated inasmuch as the petitioner has preferred her claim upon the alleged violation of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
The pension cannot be termed to be a mere concession and admittedly when the petitioner has been held entitled to the grant of pension, it cannot be said that she has no right to claim enhanced pension on the basis of SRO-310 of 1986.
5.
In State v. Avtar Krishan Megi and others, (1985 JKLR 605) a Division Bench of this court held that all the pensioners form one class and are entitled to the benefits under the liberalised scheme.
No discrimination can be made amongst the pensioners on the ground of their date of retirement.
It was held that the pensioners irrespective of their date of retirement were entitled to the benefits provided by revised pension rates.
This Court was persuaded to return the finding on the basis of the judgment of the Supreme Court in case DS Nakara and others v. Union of India (AIR 1982 SC 130).
The Supreme Court in Union of India v. Deokinandan Aggarwal, 1991(3) SCT 670 (SC) : (AIR 1992 SC 96) followed the judgment delivered in DS Nakara's case (supra) and held, "On the same reasoning and logic we have to hold that amended Act No. 38 of 1986 could not restrict the applicability of the amended provisions to only those who have retired on or after the commencement of the amending Act.
The resultant position would be that the provision of pension in Part I of first schedule as amended by Act No. 38 of 1986 would be applicable to all judges irrespective of their dates of retirement and they would be entitled to be paid pension at the rates provided therein with effect from November 1, 1986."
6.
Learned counsel for the respondent shave referred to a judgment of the Supreme Court reported in AIR 1992 SC 767 to urge that the benefit of SRO 310 cannot be given to the petitioner.
In that case also the Supreme Court approved the judgment delivered in DS Nakara's case (supra) and held :  "Whenever any rule or regulation having statutory favour is made by an authority which is a State within the meaning of Article 12, the choice is of the cut-off date which has necessarily to be introduced to effectuate such benefits is open to scrutiny by the Court and must be supported on the touchstone of Article 14.
If the choice of the date results in classification or division of members of a homogeneous group it would be open to the Court to insist that it be shown that the classification is based on an intelligible differentia and on rational consideration which bears a nexus to the purpose and object thereof.
The differential treatment accorded to those who retired prior to the specified date and those who retired subsequent thereto must be justified on the touchstone of Article 14, for otherwise it would be offensive to the philosophy of equality enshrined in the Constitution."
It was further held that the pension was not a charity, bounty or gratitious payment but was held to have been earned for rendering a long service.
Their Lordships observed :-  "The concept of pension is now well known and has been clarified by Supreme Court time and again.
It is not a charity or bounty nor is it gratitious payment solely dependant on the whim or sweet will of the employer.
It is earned for rendering long service and is often described as deferred portion of compensation for past service.
It is in fact in the nature of a social security plan to provide for the December of Life of a superannuated employee.
Such social security plans are consistent with the socio-economic requirements of the Constitution when the employer is a State within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution."
Reliance of the learned counsel for the respondents therefore, is misplaced.
The facts of the case reported in AIR 1990 SC 2043 relied upon by the learned counsel are distinguishable and do not support their case.
In that case also the Apex Court approved the judgment delivered in DS Nakara's case (supra), but, on fact, distinguished it while rejecting the case of the petitioners therein.
SRO-310 of 1986, provide : "In Schedule XV Family Pension-cum-Gratuity.
Rules, the following shall be inserted as sub-clause (bbb) below Rule 20 : (bbb) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-clause (bb) above, where a Government servant dies while in service after having rendered not less than 7 years continuous service, the rate of family pension admissible to the beneficiary of the deceased shall be equal to the pay last drawn by the deceased officer before his death.
Pension at the enhanced rates equal of the last pay shall be payable for a period of 7 years from the date following the date of death of the Government servant of or for a period up to the date on which the deceased Government servant would have attained the age of superannuation whichever is earlier.
After having drawn family pension at such enhanced rates, it will be allowed at the rate equal to 50 per cent of pay last drawn or twice the family pension admissible as per sub-rule (ii)(aaa) whichever is less and the amount as admissible shall be payable for a period of 7 years from the date the payment of enhanced pension as per preceding para ceases or till the deceased would have attained the age of 62 years whichever is earlier.
Thereafter the family pension will be payable at the ordinary rates laid down in sub-rule (ii)(aaa).
Pending cases, if any, shall be decided accordingly.
Vide SRO-346 of 1987 it was provided that "These rules shall be deemed to have come into effect from 111986."
7.
Learned counsel for the respondents have not been in a position to show the reasonableness for making discrimination depriving the benefits of SRO 310 to those who had been granted pension prior to 111986.
As the discrimination made is not based upon any reasonable criterion, same is required to be quashed and the petitioner held entitled to the benefits of SRO-310 of 1986.
8.
Under the circumstances the petition is allowed by issuing a direction to the respondents to give the benefit of SRO-310 of 1986 to the petitioner from the date said SRO came into force.
The words "These rules shall be deemed to have come into force from 111986" as incorporated in the said SRO vide SRO 346 of 1987 dt. 2461987 shall be deemed to have been quashed so far as the case of the petitioner is concerned.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.