NC Jain, J. (Oral) - This appeal arises out of a suit filed by the plaintiff-appellant who happened to be Patwari, for declaration that the orders of the Collector Rohtak dated 3379, 22679 and 6979 followed by subsequent directions given to the Accountant General, Haryana, Chandigarh for deducting a sum of Rs. 4,313.50 P. are void, honest, mala fide, arbitrary and against the principles of natural justice.
2.
Shortly stated, the facts are that the plaintiff-appellant joined in the Revenue Department in the year 1947 as Patwari and was retired from service with effect from 12679.
The plaintiff, according to his case, was working in the scale of Rs. 110-4-130/5-160/5-225 and was drawing a basic pay of Rs. 130/- per month before 1468 and was to be paid Rs. 135/- per month from 1468.
No order was passed against him either refusing or allowing him to cross efficiency bar which was due on 1468.
On the other hand, the plaintiff was allowed increments.
Further the case of the plaintiff was that he was due to cross second efficiency bar with effect from 1978 when order Exhibit P-4 was passed on 3379 withholding efficiency bar not only for one year but for all the ten years by a consolidated order.
It was further the case of the plaintiff-appellant that on 12th June, 1979 he was retired from service and thereafter another order dated 22679 Exh.
P.5 was passed stopping his efficiency bar from 1479 to 1480.
Still another order Exh.
P6 dated 6979 ordering deduction of Rs. 431350 was passed.
As has been mentioned above, all the orders were challenged by the appellant including the directions issued to the Accountant General, Haryana.
3.
The case was hotly contested by the State of Haryana.
On the basis of the pleas taken by the parties, the trial Court struck the following issues :-  (1) Whether the order of Collector dated 3379, 22679 and 6979 are illegal and without jurisdiction and liable to be quashed as alleged in the plaint ?
OPP.
(2) Whether a valid notice under Section 80 CPC has been served upon the defendant ?
OPP.
(3) Whether the suit has not been properly stamped ?
OPD.
(4) Whether the suit is time barred ?
OPD.
(5) Whether the suit is bad for non-joinder of all causes of action ?
OPD.
(6) Whether the suit is not maintainable in the present form ?
OPD.
(7) Relief.
Under Issue No. 1, the trial Court held that all the orders of the Collector were illegal and without jurisdiction and were liable to be quashed.
Under Issue No. 2, it was held that a valid notice was given.
No argument was advanced by the counsel for the State under issue No. 3 and, therefore, the same was decided in favour of the appellant holding that the suit was properly stamped.
Under Issue No. 4 the suit was held to be within time.
Issue Nos. 5 and 6 were decided against the defendant.
Consequently the suit of the plaintiff was decreed.
Feeling aggrieved against the judgment and decree of the trial Court, the State of Haryana went up in appeal before the first appellate court which has been allowed.
Plaintiff appellant is in second appeal before this Court.
4.
Mr. H S Gill, Senior Advocate, learned counsel for the appellant has argued that admittedly the appellant was not given any opportunity of being heard before the passing of the impugned order Exh.
PA His precise argument is that it was the mandatory requirement of principles of natural justice to confront the plaintiff-appellant with the material on the basis of which adverse order against him was passed and nothing of the type having been done in the present case, the order Exh.
PA deserves to be quashed on the short ground that it is against the principles of natural justice.
He has further argued that stoppage of crossing of efficiency bar for ten years by one order offends the provisions of Rule 48 of the Punjab Civil Service Rules Vol. 1 as applicable to Haryana.
In order to appreciate the argument of Mr. Gill that a consolidated order stopping efficiency bar for a period of ten years could not be passed.
It is necessary to have a look at Rule 48 of the Punjab Civil Service Rules Vol. 1 along with note 3 appended thereto.
"4.8 Where an efficiency bar is prescribed in a time scale the increment next above the bar shall not be given to a Government employee without the specific sanction of the authority empowered to withhold increments under Rule 47 or the relevant disciplinary rules applicable to the Government employee or of any other authority whom the Governor may, by general or special order authorise in this behalf.
Note 1.
* * * *  Note 2.
* * * *  Note 3.
The cases of all officers held up at the efficiency bar should be reviewed annually with a view to determine whether the quality of their work has improved and generally whether the defects for which they were stopped at the bar have been remedied to an extent sufficient to warrant the removing of the bar."
5.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that the arguments of Mr. Gill are well merited and deserve acceptance.
It has been held in Gopi Ram v. The Registrar, Co-operative Societies, Haryana and another, 1992 (5) S.L.R.
550 that order stopping an employee at the efficiency bar prejudicially affects him and before passing such an order he must be given an opportunity to explain his position.
Such an order, in the view of the Division Bench, has to be passed by the authorities on objective assessment of material placed before them.
The observations of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in OP Gupta v. Union of India and others, 1987 (5) S.L.R.
288 which are being reproduced below also help the appellant :  "It is a fundamental rule of law that no decision must be taken which will affect the rights of any person without first giving him an opportunity of putting forward his case.
Both the Privy Council as well as this Court have in a series of cases required strict adherence to the rules of natural justice where a public authority or body has to deal with rights.
There has, ever since the judgment of Lord Reid in Redge v. Baldwin, LR (1964) AC 4D been considerable fluctuation of judicial opinion in English as to the degree of strictness with which the rules of natural justice should be extended and there is growing awareness of the problems created by the extended application of principles of natural justice, or the duty to act fairly, which tends to sacrifice the administratives, efficiency and despatch, or frustrates the object of the law in question.
Since this Court has held that Lord Reid's judgment in Ridge v. Baldwin should be of assistance in deciding question relating to natural justice, there is always the duty to act 'judicially' whenever the rules of natural justice are applicable.
There is therefore the insistence upon the requirement of a 'fair dealing'.
In the light of these settled principles, we have no doubt whatever that the Government acted in flagrant breach of the rules of natural justice or fair play in passing the impugned order.
We do not see why the principles enunciated by the Court in M. Gopala Krishna Naidu v. State of Madhya Pradesh, (1968) 1 SCR 355 should not apply with equal vigour to a case like the present.
There is no reason why the power of the Government to direct the stoppage of increments at the efficiency bar on the ground of unfitness or otherwise after his retirement which prejudicially affects him should not be subject to the same limitation as engrafted by the Court in M. Gopala Krishna Naidu while dealing with the power of the Government in making a prejudicial order under FR 54, namely the duty to hear the government servant concerned after giving him full opportunity to make out his case."
(Emphasis supplied).
6.
Admittedly, the appellant was not heard before the passing of the order Exh.
P4.
It has further remained undisputed before me that the appellant was allowed to earn increments every year after 1968.
The suspension for some periods between 1970, 71 and 1973 to 1975 can be of no help to the State inasmuch as he worked between 1971 and 1973 and in view thereof even according to Rule 48 of the Rules and Note 3 appended thereto the case of the appellant should have been reviewed annually with a view to determine whether the quality of his work has improved.
This precise exercise was not done and by one consolidated order the efficiency bar of the appellant for a period of ten years was stopped and that too at a time when he was due to retire.
This, in my view, could not be done in view of the true interpretation of Rule 48 of the Punjab Civil Service Rules Vol. 1 and the Note appended thereto.
It is explicit from the reading of Note 3 that the cases of all officers held up at the efficiency bar should be reviewed annually in order to see that the quality of their work has improved.
It was to be seen generally at the end of the year whether the defects for which they were stopped at the efficiency bar have been remedied and to what extent.
No other interpretation to Note 3 of Rule 48 of the Rules is possible.
Consequently, the appellant deserves to succeed in view of the law laid down in Gopi Ram's case (supra) and O P Gupta's case (supra) and in view of the interpretation of Rule 48 of the Rules and Note 3 appended thereto.
Exh.
P4 is, therefore quashed.
Once Exh.
P4 is quashed Exh.
P.5 would automatically be set at naught.
7.
Confronted with this situation, Mr. Gulab Singh, Assistant Advocate General, Haryana has argued that the appellate court has held that the appellant was liable to pay the court fee.
I am afraid, I would not be able to agree with the submission of the counsel.
A perusal of the judgment of the trial court makes it clear that no argument was addressed by the State Counsel on Issue No. 3.
In view thereof, the appellate court would have been better advised not to take up Issue No. 3.
In any case, once the suit for declaration is decreed, the necessary consequence would be that the appellant has to be held entitled to the grant of all financial benefits which flow from the declaratory decree.
In view thereof Exh.
P6 is also set aside.
8.
For the foregoing reasons, the appeal is allowed, the judgment and decree of the appellate court is set aside and that of the trial Court is restored.
The parties are left to bear their own costs throughout.
Appeal allowed.