Harjit Singh Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioners who are employees of the Batala Co-operative Sugar Mill Limited (hereinafter called the 'Mill') had filed an application under Section 33-C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 for the determination of their wages from the Mill.
The Labour Court vide its award dated 2011991, determined the wages due to each employee and in pursuance of the recovery proceedings, the Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer, Batala, exercising the powers of Assistant Collector, attached the account of the Mill with the Gurdaspur Central Co-operative Bank Ltd on 2881991.
Aggrieved by the Award, the respondent Mill filed Civil Writ Petition No. 11158 of 1991 in this court which was admitted on 2171991 and notice regarding stay was issued on 1481991, on which date the workmen appeared and took time for filing a written statement.
The case was accordingly adjourned to 391991 for arguments on stay and on that day the following order was passed :  "Mr. Sharma wants to file additional affidavit.
Adjourned to 691991.
In the meantime, the respondents be not paid.
The attachment shall, however, continue."
It has been averred in the petition that after the passing of the aforesaid order directing that the attachment of the amount lying in the Bank would be continued, the Managing Director of the Mill pressurised the Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer to withdraw the attachment order and the said officer succumbing to the pressure actually ordered the withdrawal of the attached amount on 391991 itself.
It has been further stated in the petition that this amount was actually withdrawn from the Bank the very day although the stay order of this Court dated 391991 was passed in the presence of the counsel for the parties and was, in fact, conveyed by the petitioners to respondent No. 2 at 930 am on 4.9.1991.
It has been stated that on these grounds a clear case of contempt of this court's order of 391991 is made out.
In support of their case, the petitioners have also put on record Annexure P-1 to the petition by which they are stated to have brought to the notice of respondent No. 2 i.e. Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer about the stay order passed by this Court.
2.
The respondents in their written statements have denied any violation of this Court's order.
Respondent No. 2 has stated that he was not a party to the writ petition and the order of this Court dated 391991 was never brought to his notice prior to the release of the attachment which he had ordered.
He has also stated that the order of attachment was vacated as there was an apprehension of breach of peace at the instance of the Cane growers who were agitating for payment for the Cane supplied by them.
Respondent No. 1, i.e. the Ex-Managing Director of the Mill has also denied that he was aware of the order of this Court of 391991 at the time when he moved an application for vacation of the attachment order, or when he had withdrawn the amount lying in the Bank.
3.
After hearing the arguments addressed by the counsel for the respondents, I find no merit in this petition.
It is to be noted at the very outset that contempt proceedings are quasi-criminal in nature and the standard of proof required for conviction should be akin to that of a criminal case.
There is no concrete proof which has been put on record by the petitioner to show that the order of this Court dated 391991 had been conveyed to respondent No. 2.
It is clear that an application giving some details about this court's order was filed before respondent No. 2 on 4.9.1991, although he was not a party to the petition but at that stage the attachment had already been vacated and apparently the amount had also been withdrawn.
No fault can therefore be found on the conduct of respondent No. 2.
Although the Mill was represented by counsel on 391991 yet there can be no presumption that the order of this Court was conveyed to it.
As a matter of fact, there is no allegation in the petition that the petitioners had at any stage filed any application nor communicated any order or information to respondent No. 1.
In view of what has been held above, the present petition being without merit is dismissed.
No costs.