Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - Municipal Committee, Sirsa is the petitioner.
It is aggrieved by the award of the Labour Court by which it has ordered the reinstatement of the workman, Guruddin with full back wages and continuity of service etc.  2.
The workman was employed as a Mali for maintenance of gardens and parks in April, 1986.
His services were terminated in June 1988.
He raised a dispute which was referred to the Labour Court on August 18, 1988.
On an examination of the evidence adduced by the parties, the Labour Court found that the workman had actually worked for more than 240 days during the 12 calendar months preceding the order of termination.
It further found that the provisions of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 had not been complied with.
As a result, the Labour Court gave the impugned award.
Mr. Jatinder Kumar Sibal, learned counsel for the petitioner, has contended that the records of the Municipal Committee were destroyed during the agitation against the Mandal Commission's report.
He further submitted that the workman had been actually employed on a purely temporary basis to work as a Mali on work-charge basis and that he had worked intermittently from April, 1986 to June 21, 1988, He further submitted that in the circumstances of the case, there was no justification for ordering his reinstatement with full back wages.
This claim made on behalf of the petitioner was controverted by Mr. KS Keer, learned counsel for respondent-workman.
3.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I find that the Labour Court has recorded a clear finding of fact that the respondent has worked for 240 days during the 12 calendar months preceding the order of termination of his services.
It has not been shown that his finding is perverse or contrary to the evidence on record.
It is also the admitted position that the provisions of Section 25-F had not been complied with.
In this situation, the finding of the Labour Court that the termination was illegal has to be sustained.
4 As for the payment of full back wages, it may be mentioned that the workman had appeared before this Court on November 11, 1992 to support his claim under Section 17-B of the Act.
It was averred in the application that "the applicant/workman is unemployed and needs this interim payment of wages immediately to live ...... "On being asked he had admitted that he was working as a labourer on daily wages at different places as and when he got some work.
According to him, he was working on an average for 15 to 20 days in a month.
This position has not been controverted.
Mr. Keer has only relied on a decision of this Court in Engineer-in-Chief, Irrigation Deptt.
Haryana v. Sh. Sube Singh, 1993(2) L.L.J.
289 : 1993(2) SCT 353 (P&H).
This was a decision rendered in an application under Section 17-B The view taken by the leaned Judge that the workman was entitled to current wages has not been accepted by a Division Bench of this Court in Duladi Coop.
Agri.
Service Society.
v. Gurcharan Singh & Anr., L.P.A. No. 657 of 1993, decided on September 28, 1993.
Furthermore, the consideration under Section 17-B is that the workman is not employed in an establishment.
However, while setting aside the order of termination, back wages are awarded to the workman to compensate him for the actual loss suffered by him.
If the workman has remained gainfully employed, the compensation has to be proportionately reduced.
In this situation, it appears reasonable to award 50% wages to the workman,  5.
The award of the Labour Court is accordingly modified to the extent that the workman shall be entitled to payment of back wages to the extent of only 50 per cent.
6.
The writ petition is accordingly disposed of.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.