Harjit Singh Bedi, J - By this judgment we propose to dispose of Letters Patent Appeal Nos. 1734 and 212 of 1989 and CWP.
No. 9240, 11852 and 12943 of 1990.
The facts are being taken from the first case.
2.
The facts of the case are that the respondents were employed by the Department of Irrigation in the State of Punjab in the early part of 1970 in a newly created Division in the Irrigation Department known as 'Directorate of the Water Resources'.
Apart from the routine posts which could be filled by transfer from amongst engineers working in the Irrigation Department, there were some newly created posts of a specialised nature which were required to be filled in from those having special qualifications.
A detailed discussion took place between the representative of the State of Punjab and a Central Team dealing with this matter and, vide letter dated 20th October, 1970 (appended as Annexure P-1 with the writ petition) issued by the Planning Department, the Staff required for the Directorate was duly sanctioned.
Vide this letter the posts of Senior Hydrogeologist and Senior Design Engineer were equated with the post of Deputy Director and the posts of Hydrochemist, Junior Geologist and Junior Hydrogeologist were equated with the post of Assistant Design Engineer in the same pay scale as Class II posts, whereas the post of Senior Technical Assistant, a newly created post in the Directorate, was not equated with any existing post in the Irrigation Department though it was placed higher to the post of Sectional Officer in the Engineering Wing.
From the pleadings, it is also apparent that initially the posts in the Directorate were created for a period of ten years from 1971 to 1981 but were thereafter extended for another ten years from 1981 to 1991 and it is the conceded case that the said posts are still continuing.
It has been asserted that during all these years the specialised posts remained equated with the respective posts in the Engineering Wing in the matter of pay scales and, as a sequel thereto, even the Second Pay Commission recommended the continuance of the parity that already existed.
It is the conceded position that these proposals were largely accepted by the Government and the pay suggested for the employees of the Directorate was duly notified.
It appears, however, that with regard to the members of the Engineering service the decision with regard to pay scales to be given to them was kept in abeyance and was subsequently notified on August 18, 1980.
Vide Annexure P-8 whereby the Engineering Wing was given a higher pay scale than that recommended by the Pay Commission and vide Annexure P-9 dated January 14, 1981 the Pay scales were further revised upwards for this Wing.
Aggrieved by this disparity the respondents represented to the Government but the representation was turned down.
The matter was thereafter taken to this Court and, as already indicated, the writ petition has been partly allowed leading to this appeal at the instance of the State Government and LPA No. 212 of 1989 by the opposite party claiming the reliefs denied by the learned Single Judge.
3.
Before the learned Single Judge only two arguments were addressed : firstly, that the respondents were entitled to the scale of pay as given to the equated posts in the Engineering Wing of the Irrigation Department, and secondly, that the specialised posts in the Directorate should not be filled from the members of the Engineering Service as they did not have the necessary qualifications and if these appointments continued, they would frustrate the possibility of the respondents being promoted to the higher posts in the Directorate.
The learned Single Judge found on a reading of Annexure P-1 that the post of Senior Hydrogeologist had been equated with the post of Deputy Director which post was always manned by a Senior Executive Engineer; the post of Junior Hydrogeologist to the post of Assistant Design Engineer and the post of Senior Hydrogeologist to that of Senior Design Engineer.
It was also noticed that the pay scales of the various categories in the specialised posts had been revised as under by the Second Pay Commission :  Sr. No.
Designation Existing scale of pay Revised scale of pay  XX XX XX  6.
Senior Hydrologist, Rs. 800-1600, Rs. 1400-2000.
7.
Senior Geophysicist, Rs. 800-1600, Rs. 1400-2000.  xx xx xx  24.
Junior Hydrogeologist, Rs. 400-1100, Rs825-1700.
25.
Junior Geologist, Rs400-1100, Rs. 825-1700.
26.
Hydrochemist, Rs400-1100, Rs825-1700.
xx xx xx xx  It was also recorded by the learned Single Judge that the equated posts in the Engineering Wing had a much higher scale of pay as per Annexure P-9, and accordingly relying on KK Mehta v. The State of Punjab, 1983(3) SLR 732, Harsaran Singh v. The State of Punjab, 1984(2) SLR 384 and Kirpal Jeet v. The State of Punjab, 1987(4) SLR 594 held that once two posts had been equated there was no reason to discontinue that equation at a later stage on revision of pay scales.
On this process of reasoning the learned Judge accepting the equation of posts mentioned above, and detailed in full in Annexure P-1 held that the respondents were entitled to a parity of pay scales with their counterparts in the Engineering Wing but as the Senior Technical Assistants in the Directorate could not claim equation with any post in the parent department, no benefit could be given to them.
In the second point urged before him relief was, however, denied on the ground that those persons who had come from the Engineering Service to man the specialised posts in the Directorate had not been impleaded as respondents in the writ petition and, as such, no relief could be given in their absence although liberty was given to the Government to pass appropriate orders in this respect promptly.
3.
Shri Jagmohan Singh Chaudhary, learned Addl.
Advocate-General, has urged that the matter with regard to equation of posts and parity of pay scales was exclusively within the purview of specialised agencies such as the Pay Commissions and the ultimate decision was to be taken by the Government and, as such, no interference by the Court in these matters was called for.
He has relied on State of UP v. J P Chaurasia, AIR 1989 SC 19 and Grih Kalyan Kendra Workers' Union v. Union of India, JT 1991(1) SC 60 : 1991(2) SCT 95.
4.
Mr. Surya Kant, learned counsel for the respondents, has, however, relied on the judgment of this Court cited before the learned Single Judge and has, in addition, relied on Employees of Tannery & Footwear Corp of India Ltd v. Union of India, 1991(2) SCT 339 : AIR 1991 SC 1367.
5-6.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and find no merit in the appeals.
Undoubtedly, it is for the specialised agencies and the Executive Authorities to determine the equation of posts and the parity of pay scales, but as held by this Court in the three cases cited before the learned Single Judge and now by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Employees of T & F Corporation of India's case (supra) that once the posts have been equated and that equation still existed, then such posts must continue to have a parity of pay scales.
The judgments of this Court have already been referred to by the learned Single Judge and need not be discussed by us but the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court being later in point of time needs to be referred to in some detail.
Their Lordships of the Supreme Court while distinguishing the judgment in Employees of T & F Corporation of India's case held as under :  "Here we are not concerned with equation of posts because the posts falling in the abovementioned four categories of employees in the respondent-Corporation as well as the Cotton Corporation of India are of the same level and employees working on these posts were having the same pay scales in 1970.
There is nothing on the record to show that after 1970 there has been any change in the duties and functions of the persons holding these posts in the two Corporations which may justify fixation of different pay scales for these posts in the two Corporations."
It will, thus, be apparent that the Supreme Court itself indicated that equation could end if there was a change in the duties or functions of the equated posts, and we further add that if any equation is to discontinue, it must be after due application of mind and after according plausible reasons.
No reason, whatsoever, has been pointed out by the counsel for the State-appellant.
For the reasons recorded above, the challenge in this appeal to the first point decided in favour of the respondents, is without force.
7.
As already noticed above, the challenge to the appointment of members of the Engineering Service, in the specialised posts in the Directorate was repelled on the ground that those persons who had come from the Engineering service had not been impleaded in the writ petition as respondents.
Apparently taking a cue from the discussion of the learned Single Judge and to meet the argument some officials of the Directorate have filed CWP No. 12943 of 1990 making the same prayer impleading those persons as parties.
Mr. MK Tiwari, learned counsel for the petitioners, in this case has urged that the lacuna pointed out by the learned Single Judge now stood removed and as such the second relief urged should now be made available in this petition.
We do not agree.
It is to be noted that the appointments of the respondents in this petition were made way back in the year 1981 and were not challenged up to the year 1990 and that too after the judgment of the learned Single Judge.
We, therefore, feel that it would be inappropriate to disturb these appointments but we do issue a direction that in future if appointments are to be made in the Directorate, they should be made only from such persons who fulfil the requisite qualifications laid down by the Department itself although the liberty to change such qualifications is left with the State Government.
8.
Mr. Surya Kant, learned counsel for the appellants, in LPA No. 212 of 1989 and CWP No. 11852 of 1990, and Mr. Tiwari, learned counsel in C.W.P.
No. 9420 of 1990 have finally urged that the Senior Technical Assistants who had been denied relief by the learned Single Judge should also be shown consideration and should be granted pay scales equivalent to their status.
We are, however, of the opinion that this is the matter which is within the domain of the Government as held by the Supreme Court in the cases cited by the learned State Counsel and the aggrieved parties, if so advised, may seek their relief there.
9.
For the reasons recorded above, the present appeals as also C.W.P.
No. 9240, 11852 and 12943 of 1990 are dismissed subject to the observations made above.
There will, however, be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.