GR Majithia, J - The petitioner has challenged office order, dated July 15, 1986 passed by the Executive Director, The Punjab Scheduled Castes Land Development and Finance Corporation, Chandigarh, whereby he was reverted from the post of Enforcement Officer and posted in the Accounts Department, in this writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as Accounts Assistant on October 31, 1973 in the Punjab Scheduled Castes Land Development and Finance Corporation, Chandigarh (for short, the Corporation).
The Assistants when posted in the field are designated as Field Officers and otherwise, at the Head Office they are designated as Assistants.
The Board of Directors in exercise of powers conferred under Regulation 4(d) of the Punjab Scheduled Castes Land Development and Finance Corporation General Regulations made amendments and thereby added the post of Internal Auditor in the list of posts from which promotion could be made to the post of Enforcement Officer.
The conditions of service of the employee of the Corporation are governed by the Punjab Scheduled Castes Land Development and Finance Corporation (Staff) Regulations, 1971 (for brevity, Regulations, 1971), wherein the inter se seniority is determined according to Regulation 25 of the Regulations, 1971.
The same reads thus :  "25.
Seniority : The inter-seniority of persons appointed to posts carrying the same scale of pay shall be determined by the dates of their substantive appointments to such posts :  Provided that if two or more persons are substantively appointed to such posts on the same date, their seniority shall be determined as under :  (i) a person recruited by promotion from the service of the Corporation shall be senior to a person recruited otherwise.
Provided that in the case of promotion of two or more persons, their inter-seniority shall be determined according to their seniority in the posts from which they have been promoted.
(ii) a person on deputation shall be senior to a person recruited by direct appointment :.
Provided that in the case of two or more persons on deputation, their inter-seniority shall be determined according to their seniority in the parent service.
(iii) in the case of persons recruited by direct appointment, the older in age shall rank senior to the younger; and  (iv) in any other case, the person in the higher scale of pay shall be considered to be senior to a person in the lower scale of pay and where the scales of pay are identical, the person drawing higher salary shall rank senior.
Note : A person, who in view of his qualifications and previous experience, is granted initial increments in the grade at the time of his appointment, may be granted seniority for a period upto one year for every two increments granted to him in the grade to which he is appointed by the Executive Director, subject, in the case of an Officer, to the prior approval of the Board."
3.
The inter se seniority of the posts carrying the same pay scale would be determined on the basis of the date of substantive appointments to the said posts.
The posts of Assistants, Accounts Assistant, Field Officer, Internal Auditor and Cashier are in the same scale of pay viz Rs. 225-500 (now revised to Rs. 570-1080).
Respondent No. 2 was posted as Field Officer in 1978 and he continued as such till the year, 1980.
He was senior to the petitioner as Assistant/Field Officer, but was not considered for promotion as Enforcement Officer when the petitioner was promoted.
The tentative seniority list was circulated by the Corporation vide letter, dated May 26, 1977 and respondent No. 2 made representation, dated June 14, 1977 for not assigning him correct position in the seniority list.
His representation was accepted and he was assigned seniority at Sr. No. 18-A in the joint seniority list of Assistants/Accounts Assistants/Field Officers/Internal Auditors and Cashiers.
After he was assigned correct position in the seniority list, his claim for promotion against the post of Enforcement Officer was considered and he was promoted as Enforcement Officer and adjusted against at point No. 16 reserved for Scheduled Castes in the roster of promotion of the Enforcement Officer.
Since the petitioner had been appointed as Enforcement Officer against Sr. No. 16 and he being the junior was reverted and posted in the Accounts Section.
4.
This petition came up for hearing before M M Punchhi, J (as his Lordship then was) on September 24, 1987.
It was represented before him that the petitioner was not given an opportunity of hearing before disturbing his seniority and as a consequent thereto, reverted him to the post of Assistant.
The learned Single Judge found that the matter was of considerable nature and observing thus :  "I have heard the learned counsel on some detail and have come to the view that the matter as such deserves to be heard by a larger Bench.
I need not quote the judicial precedents cited by either side, for they are many but the scattered judicial thought on the subject needs to be arranged and tied up as there are some ends which give rise to doubt and uncertainty.
One of the views is that in affecting seniority, the affected employee must be given an opportunity of being heard and that he has a locus standi to voice his grievance in courts of law.
This view is in abstract de hors of what he had to say against the action taken on opportunity granted.
There are other cases in which an employee complaining of breach of the rule of audi alteram partem had to prima facie establish that he had a case on the basis of the statute, rule or practice to have the status quo ante restored for which he clamoured for an opportunity of being heard.
In those cases the petitions were allowed by this Court and the matter sent back for re-decision to the concerned authority.
Yet there are other cases in which it has been taken that the government can correct its own mistake re-seniority of its employees and need not afford an opportunity of being heard to the affected employee whose position is changed to his discomfiture.
Further if seniority can be disturbed without giving an opportunity of being heard to the concerned person, then shall the necessary consequences not allowed to follow without observance of the rule of audi alteram partem is the equal question.
The instant case is of the consequential reversion of the petitioner.
Sitting in Single Bench, I cannot entwine all these thoughts lest it tread upon some of the views of the Larger Benches Therefore, let the papers of this case be placed before my Lord and Chief Justice for pleasure of his constituting a Larger Bench of the size he deems proper.
This being special order case for enlistment should have its priority maintained."
desired that the case should be heard by a Larger Bench.
It is how this petition has been listed before us for disposal.
5.
The significant questions of law arising for determination in this petition are :  (i) Is an opportunity of hearing required to be granted before the seniority of any person is revised to his detriment ?
and  (ii) Can he be reverted to a lower post without the grant of an opportunity ?
6.
One of the basic principles of natural justice is 'hear the other side'.
Initially judicial opinion was that grant of an opportunity was required only while passing a judicial order or quasi-judicial order and that in a purely administrative function/order, opportunity had no role to play.
However, with the efflux of time, the grant of an opportunity has become a requirement of law even for a purely administrative act.
Still further the concept of opportunity being a basic requirement has been extended to every action which has adverse civil or penal consequences.
Alteration of seniority and reversion have been held to have civil consequences and consequently, alter-action of seniority or reversion from a given rank without the grant of an opportunity have been held to be vitiated, being violative of basic principles of natural justice.
7.
In State of Orissa v. Dr. Ms. Beena Pani Dei, AIR 1967 Supreme Court, 1269, the Supreme Court held that an order by the State to the prejudice of a person in derogation of his vested right may be made only in accordance with the basic rule of justice and fair play, The rule that a party to whose prejudice an order is intended to be passed entitled to a hearing applies alike to Judicial Tribunals and bodies of persons invested with authority to adjudicate upon matters involving civil consequences.
It is one of the fundamental rights of our constitutional set up that every citizen is protected against exercise of arbitrary authority by the State of its Officers.
Duty to add judicially would, therefore, arise from the very nature of the function intended to be performed.
It need not be shown to be super added.
If there is power to decide and determine to the prejudice of a person, duty to act judicially is implicit in the exercise of such power.
If the essential of justice is ignored and an order to the prejudice of a person is made, the order is nullity.
Thereafter, the Supreme Court held thus :  "It is true that the order is administrative in character, but even an administrative order which involves civil consequences, as already stated, must be made consistently with the rules of natural justice after informing first respondent of the case of the State the evidence in support thereof and after giving an opportunity to the first respondent of being heard and meeting or explaining the evidence."
8.
In Naranjan Dass Sehgal v. State of Punjab, 1968 S.L.R.
183, the principle of audi alteram partem (hearing the other side) was held to be required to be adhered to in all matters of quasi-judicial nature when contending claims of two persons have to be adjudicated upon.
Change of seniority of the petitioner without the grant of an opportunity was held to be vitiated and violative of this fundamental principle.
On that basis, reversion of the petitioner as a consequence of disturbance of his seniority was quashed.
(L.P.A. filed against this judgment was dismissed on January 5, 1968).
In Union of India v. P K Roy, 1968 S.L.R.
104, (before the Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court), it was contended that no opportunity was given to the respondents to make a representation against the inter se seniority list, dated February 20, 1962 and that the list was wrongly prepared and that the respondents should have been given an opportunity of making representation with regard to the inter se seniority list, dated February 20, 1962.
It was further argued that the final gradation list should have been published only after giving the respondent an opportunity to make a representation.
The Constitution Bench observed thus :  "Normally speaking, we should have thought that one opportunity for making representation against the preliminary list published would have been sufficient to satisfy the requirement of law.
But the extent and application of the doctrine of natural justice cannot be imprisoned within the straight- jacket of rigid formula.
The application of the doctrine depends upon the nature of the jurisdiction conferred on the administrative authority upon the character of the rights of the persons affected, the scheme and the policy of the statute and other relevant circumstances discussed in the particular case.
In view of special circumstances of the present case, we think that the respondents were entitled to an opportunity to make a representation with regard to the two points urged by Mr. Ashok Sen before the final gradation list was published.
As no such opportunity was furnished to the respondent with regard to the two matters we hold that the combined final gradation list, dated 6th of April, 1952 so far as category 6 is concerned is ultra vires and illegal and that part of the notification alone must be quashed by grant of a right in the nature of Certiorari.
Rest of the notification of the State Government, dated 6th of April, 1952 with regard to that category will stand unaffected.
So far as category 6 is concerned, the Central Government is directed to give an opportunity to the respondents to make representation in regard to the two points mentioned in this paragraph and thereafter, takes steps to finalise and publish the list in accordance with law."
9.
In Purta Purtabpur Company Ltd v. Cane Commissioner, A.I.R. 1970 Supreme Court, 1896, the Apex Court held that while accepting the representation filed by one party, it was incumbent to give an opportunity of hearing to the other party.
The Apex Court observed thus :  "The representation made by the 5th respondent or even the substance thereof were not made available to the appellant.
The proposal to split the reserved area into two or in the manner in which it was proposed to be split was not made known to the appellant and his objections invited in that regard.
The appellant complains that the manner in which the area had been divided had caused great prejudice to it.
Its grievance may or may not be true but the fact remains that it had no opportunity to represent against the same.
Hence, the appellant is justified in complaining that the principles of natural justice had been contravened."
10.
The principle laid down in this authority was respectfully followed by a Division Bench of this Court is Shashi Kade v. The State of Punjab, CWP No. 1496 of 1977, decided on August 2, 1977, wherein it was held that reversion of the petitioner on the representation of the respondents being allowed without the grant of an opportunity was vitiated.
Similar view was taken in Sriniwas Sharma v. State of Punjab, 1986(2) S.L.R.
24.
Before the decision of Sriniwas Sharma's case (supra), this Court has consistently held that fixing the seniority of a Government servant of his disadvantage would seriously affect his future chances of promotion in service.
Under the principles of natural justice, he must be given notice before revising his seniority in the list to his detriment.
(See in this connection, Union of India v. Madan Lal, 1971(2) S.L.R.
51; K D Vasudeva v. Union of India, 1971(2) S.L.R.
487; Satnam Singh v. K S Chauhan, 1973 (1) S.L.R.
11; Hardev Singh v.
P.S.E.B., 1974 SWLR 424; and Apar Appar Singh v. Secretary to Government, Punjab, 1980 (3) S.L.R.
747).
In S L Kapoor v. Jagmohan, AIR 1981 Supreme Court, 136, the Appex Court held thus :  "In our view the principles of natural justice know of no exclusionary rules dependent on whether it would have made any difference if natural justice had been observed.
The non-observance of natural justice is itself prejudice to any man, and proof of denial of natural justice is unnecessary.
It will come from a person, who had denied justice that the person who has been denied justice is not prejudiced."
11.
Thus, the Supreme Court held that independently of prejudice being caused or not the rules of natural justice could not be flouted.
Their Lordships further held thus :  "The old distinction between a judicial act and an administration act has withered away and we have been liberated from the psittacine incantation of 'administrative action'.
Now, from the time of the decision of this Court in State of Orissa v. Dr. (Miss) Binapani Dei, (1967) 2 SCR 625 : (AIR 1967 SC 1269), "even an administrative order which involves civil consequences... must be made consistently with the rules of natural justice".
What are civil consequences ?
The question was posed and answered by this Court in Mohinder Singh Gill v. The Chief Election Commissioner, New Delhi, (1978) 2 S.C.R. 272 : (AIR 1978 SC 851), Krishna Iyer, J, speaking for the Constitution Bench said (at PP 308-309) :  "But what is a civil consequence, let us ask ourselves, by passing verbal booby-traps ?
'Civil consequence' undoubtedly cover infraction of not merely property or personal rights but of civil liberties, material deprivations and non-pecuniary damages.
In its comprehensive connotation, everything that affects a citizen in his civil life inflicts a civil consequence."
12.
The ratio of this judgment was followed by a Division Bench of this Court in Varinder Chawla v. Chandigarh Administration, 1984(1) S.L.R.
452, wherein this Court held that an opportunity of hearing was required to be granted before a person could be reverted from a post notwithstanding the fact that the order of his promotion was illegal and void ab initio having been passed by an authority not competent to do so.
13.
Again in Ex. Cap.
K C Arora v. The State of Haryana, 1984(2) S.L.R.
97, the Apex Court held the seniority to be a vested right.
In this case, benefits of antedated seniority taking into account the military service during the period of emergency had been granted to the employees.
These benefits were sought to be taken away by retrospective amendment to the rules.
Relying upon the Constitution Bench in State of Gujarat v. Raman Lal Keshav Lal Soni, 1983 Supreme Court Cases 33, the Apex Court held that the vested rights cannot be impaired or taken away by retrospective amendment to the rules.
Thus, the Supreme Court elevated seniority to the pedestal of the vested right.
14.
The learned counsel for the respondents placed reliance upon the ratio in Sunder Lal v. The State of Punjab through the Secretary to Government, P.W.D.
Chandigarh and 236 others, 1970 SLR 59, wherein it was held that if the benefits of confirmation and seniority had been given by mis-interpretation of the rules, Government can withdraw the benefits given and Article 311 not attracted.
The Bench was not dealing with the proposition, which has been referred to for adjudication by the learned Single Judge.
15.
Here in the instant case, we are only concerned with the principles whether the administrative order, which involves civil consequence must be made consistent with the rules of natural justice.
This principle has been authoritatively settled by the Apex Court in series of cases of this Court.
In the light of the decision in S L Kapoor's case (Supra), it is no more open to challenge that the vested right can be impaired or taken away in violation of the principles of natural justice.
16.
In the light of what we have stated above, the order or reversion of the petitioner cannot be sustained since it was passed without hearing the petitioner.
17.
For the reasons stated above, the writ petition succeeds and order of reversion, dated July 15, 1986 is quashed with no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.