SK Jain, J - Rattan Chand was employed as peon in Municipal Committee, Dera Baba Nanak in the year 1949.
He was retired on 131980 after completion of sixty years of service.
He filed Civil Suit No. 70 of 2131984 against the Municipal Committee for a decree of declaration not the effect that order bearing No. 89/68 dated 131980, whereby he was retired from service, was illegal.
2.
The suit was contested by the Municipal Committee.
Besides taking preliminary objections with regard to limitation, res judicata and absence of territorial jurisdiction of the Civil Court at Gurdaspur, it was contended on their behalf that the plaintiff had been rightly retired at the age of sixty years.
The Sub-Judge IInd Class, Gurdaspur, vide his judgment and decree dated 19.2.1985, dismissed the suit of the plaintiff.
3.
Civil Appeal No. 88 instituted on 1831985 by the plaintiff was dismissed by the Additional District Judge, Gurdaspur vide his judgment and decree dated 2721986.
4.
It is that judgment and decree dated 2721986 of the first appellate Court which has been appealed against by the plaintiff and which requires my examination of its sustainability.
5.
Along with this Regular Second Appeal Civil Miscellaneous Application No. 2283-C of 1986 under Order 6 Rule 17 read with Section 151 CPC for permission to amend the plaint and still another Civil Miscellaneous Application No. 2284-C of 1986 under Order 41 Rule 127 read with Section 151 CPC for permission to bring on record letter No. 13848 dated 1251981 and prove the same on record was filed.
These two Civil Miscellaneous applications are also proposed to be disposed of alongwith this Regular Second Appeal.
6.
I have seen the pleadings in the suit, the evidence adduced by the parties in the suit and the judgments of both the Courts below.
7.
First argument of the learned counsel for the appellant is that on 2831981, the appellant had made representation to the Director, Local Self Government, Punjab, Chandigarh, against his retirement that his representation was dismissed on 1251981, so the suit instituted on 2131984 was well within time.
But the learned Courts below have not taken into consideration this important fact and have, therefore, legally erred in returning a finding against the appellant to the issue of limitation.
It is not disputed that the order of retirement of the plaintiff was passed on 131980 and he had filed the suit on 1931984, after four years.
The case of the plaintiff before the Subordinate Court was that the plaintiff before the Subordinate Court had filed a suit in the Court of Senior Sub-Judge, Gurdaspur and the plaint thereof was rejected by that Court on 24121983 and therefore, in the peculiar circumstances, the delay in filing the suit may be condoned under Section 5 of the Limitation Act.
This plea did not find favour with the learned Subordinate Court and he returned a finding against the plaintiff on this point.
8.
The lower appellate Court had said in its judgment :  (i) that the plaintiff having not challenged his retirement from service within three years of the date of his retirement or within three years and two months ie after excluding the notice period, his suit was barred by limitation.
Perusal of the record shows that vide order Ex.P-5 dated 24121983, the plaint in suit of the plaintiff-appellant was rejected under Order 7 Rule 11 CPC by the Senior Sub-Judge, Gurdaspur on the ground that a notice under Section 49 of the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911 had not been served on the Municipal Committee Dera Baba Nanak.
This order of the learned Senior Sub-Judge, Gurdaspur became final because it was never challenged before any Court.
9.
Here in this Regular Second Appeal all together a new ground on the point of limitation has been taken to the effect that letter No. 13848 dated 1251981 vide which the appellant was informed that his representation to the Director, Local Self Government, Punjab, Chandigarh against the order of his retirement had been misplaced and, therefore, could not be produced at the trial of the suit.
In order to substantiate this ground, the above mentioned Civil Miscellaneous applications have been moved and the learned counsel for the appellant has vehemently argued that if this document is allowed to be placed on the record and proved then the limitation for filing the suit would be reckoned with effect from 1251981 and the suit instituted on 2131984 would be well within limitation.
I regret my inability to agree with the learned counsel for the appellant.
Firstly, because it was never a case of the plaintiff at any stage of the suit and the appeal before the lower appellate Court that he had filed a representation against the order of his retirement which was rejected on 1251981 and since that letter (No. 13848 dated 1251981) had been misplaced, he should be allowed to lead secondary evidence by calling for the record of the office of the Director, Local Self Government, Punjab, Chandigarh.
Rather, in his cross-examination the plaintiff appearing as PW-1 has stated in unambiguous terms as under :-  "I filed an appeal to the Deputy Director, Local Bodies.
Till now no decision was given in that appeal."
The above statement of the plaintiff was recorded on 26111984.
Thus, it is clear that upto 26111984 letter No. 13848 dated 1251981 which is now desired to be placed on record through amendment of the plaint and leading additional evidence, had not seen the light of the day.
10.
Secondly, learned counsel for the appellant has not been able to show any rule or regulation governing the service conditions of the appellant under which such a representation/appeal was competent.
Thus, I do not find any merit in either of the above mentioned civil miscellaneous applications as also in the abovesaid argument of the learned counsel for the appellant.
11.
Second argument of the learned counsel for the appellant is that both the Courts below have legally erred in not reading entry with regard to date of birth of the appellant in his service book Ex.P-1 correctly.
As a matter of fact, the correct date of birth of appellant was 18.2.1925 instead of 1821920 and if somebody had tampered with figure 5 of the year 1925 in his service book which was in the control and power of the Municipal Committee concerned he could not be penalised therefore.
Moreover, both the Courts below have again illegally overlooked School Leaving Certificate Mark 'A' which proves the case of the appellant that his date of birth was 1821920.
In order to appreciate this argument, I have gone through the statement of DW-1 Shanti Sarup, Secretary, Municipal Committee, Batala.
He has stated that the retirement of the plaintiff fell on 131980.
He served a notice upon the plaintiff and then he was relieved from the service.
He did not reply to that notice and that the plaintiff had not produced any document before him, in order to rebut the entry in his service book regarding the date of his birth.
12.
Before the lower appellate Court the plaintiff/appellant had moved an application under Order 41 Rule 27 CPC for proving on record School Leaving Certificate which he procured from West Pakistan, by way of additional evidence.
This application was allowed vide order dated 4111985 by the Additional District Judge, Gurdaspur.
Thereupon, Durga Dass, Secretary, Municipal Committee, Dera Baba Nanak was examined by the plaintiff-appellant as PW-2.
He had made the entry in service book of the plaintiff in his hand, in figures (as 18.2.1925) after verifying the same from his School Leaving Certificate and he did not tamper with the last figure of the year.
He further stated that the entry relating to the date of birth in words was not in his hand.
In his cross-examination before the lower appellate Court, the plaintiff-appellant had stated that at the time of joining in the Municipal Committee he had submitted a School Leaving Certificate in printed form.
The plaintiff took no steps to prove on record the School Leaving Certificate on the basis whereof the entry with regard to his date of birth was made by said witness in this service book.
Neither Shanti Sarup DW-1 Secretary, Municipal Committee nor Durga Dass, Ex-Secretary, Municipal Committee was cross-examined on this point.
Statement of the plaintiff-appellant was also recorded by the lower appellate Court.
Wherein, he has stated that he was studying in Government Lower Middle School, Kotla Agfhana, Tehsil Sialkot and he received certificate Mark 'A' from there by post.
Learned lower appellate Court has rightly not attached any value to the School Leaving Certificate Mark-A, because it has not been proved on record nor connected with the plaintiff.
Moreover, it was not authenticated by the Indian Embassy in Pakistan.
Therefore, this document does not in any way improves the case of the plaintiff.
Learned trial Court has rightly found in the latter part of para No. 12 of its judgment as under :  "Further the plaintiff has himself stated that this was the date of birth as per educational certificate and birth certificate produced by him in the Municipal Committee when he joined his service.
If the plaintiff claims that the Municipal Committee has fabricated his date of birth, then he would have produced the original certificate to prove his date of birth, which would have been the best evidence to prove the date of birth.
But he has not produced this certificate to prove his date of birth, so adverse inference would be drawn and it is presumed that the date of birth is 1821920 and not 1925."
13.
In view of the above discussion, I do not find any substance in the second argument of the learned counsel for the appellant.
14.
In the result, this appeal failed and the judgment and decree of the lower appellate Court is confirmed.
No costs.
Order accordingly.