VK Bali, J - The sole question that requires to be determined in the present writ filed by the Punjab State Electricity Board, Patiala, under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, challenging the award rendered by the Labour Court, Ludhiana, is as to whether holding of enquiry in respect of misconduct of workman before ordering his retrenchment, is mandatory even if the misconduct is otherwise proved on the records of the case.
2.
The facts that have been proved on the records of the case, reveal that Swaran Singh joined the service of petitioner-Board on February 23, 1977 and was promoted as Lineman on October 3, 1978.
While he was working on the promoted post, he applied for casual leave from February 4, 1984 to February 8, 1984 and left the office without getting the same sanctioned from the competent authority.
Even after the expiry of unsanctioned causal leave, he did not return to his duty and abandoned the job, as per case of petitioner.
The Sub Divisional Officer of the Board addressed letter to him asking him to resume his duties.
Thereafter the Executive Engineer addressed yet another letter to him on June 27, 1984 at his permanent home address, once again asking him to join his duties.
The same was returned by the postal authorities with the remarks that 'he had gone abroad.'
Thereafter, notice was published in the daily 'The Tribune' dated May 6, 1985 directing the workman to report for duty within thirty days, failing which his services shall be terminated.
Even this public notice evoked no interest with him as he did not resume his duties even after the expiry of the period mentioned therein.
The Board, considering the circumstances as mentioned above, passed order removing him from service on December 12, 1985.
The order, however, was given effect from February 4, 1984, the day on which he had abandoned the services of the Board.
It is pleaded that the Superintending Engineer of the Board while passing order dated December 12, 1985 was of the opinion that in the circumstances of the case, it was not possible to hold enquiry against the workman as he had gone abroad and even after repeated communications asking him to join, he had not done so.
The Superintending Engineer, therefore, dispensed with the holding of enquiry under rule 14(ii) of the Employees Punishment and Appeal Regulations, 1971 and passed formal order as mentioned above.
It is for the first time on April 26, 1986, that is, after the expiry of more than two years since the workman had gone on unsanctioned leave, that he served a demand notice on the petitioner-management stating that his services had been wrongly terminated.
When the reconciliation proceedings failed, the matter was referred to the Labour Court by the Government under Section 10(1)(c) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
The Labour Court, vide its Award dated October 28, 1991 held that the order of retrenchment was bad and the workman is entitled to reinstatment but since he was not without blames as he did not even assert that he ever reported for duty or even sent any communication right from the date i.e. February 4, 1984 to the date of demand notice he was not entitled to back wages from February 4, 1984, the date of termination to April 26, 1986 when he served a demand notice on the management.
Obviously, while returning a finding in favour of the workman that he was entitled to be reinstated with continuity of service, it was held that it was not a case of abandonment and the department, infact had taken action against for him his long absence from duty but before the order of termination could be passed, an enquiry had to be held in the matter.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner-Board vehemently contends that it is always open to the management to prove the guilt of the workman during the course of proceedings before the Labour Court and in case the management is able to prove so, the only relief that a workman can get is to ask for the wages upto the date, an order is passed by the Labour Court holding him guilty of the charges that might have been levelled against him.
In the present case, he contends from the pleadings of the parties and the evidence that was recorded before the Labour Court, it was proved beyond shadow of any reasonable doubt that the workman had in fact left the job on account of his own violation and had not cared to resume his duties even though several letters were written to him and even a notice was got issued in the newspaper.
All that workman could say before the Labour Court was that he had made request to rejoin the duties on May 19, 1985, i.e. after about a year and three months from the date he had gone on unsanctioned leave but for which there was no proof placed on the records of the case, except bald assertion in the statement made by him that when his father told him about the press publication, he approached the SDE Circle for posting orders, contends the learned counsel.
4.
Mr. SP Soi, learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondent-workman, however, contends that the management had not claimed an issue on the point and the case of the workman cannot be prejudiced as he might have been in a position to explain his absence if his attention had been adverted to the fact that the allegation against him with regard to unsanctioned leave and absence from duty, is subject matter of enquiry before the Labour Court.
5.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and going through the records of the case, this court is of the view that when the pleadings of the management while defending the cause of workman unmistakably point towards the guilt of the workman and the parties lead evidence, than non-framing of an issue would pale into insignificance.
The claim of the workman was resisted by the management and in the written statement that was filed by it, it was clearly pleaded that the workman himself abandoned the job w.e.f.
February 4, 1984.
He had proceeded on unsanctioned leave on February 4, 1984 and thereafter never joined his duties.
Several letters were written by the authorities asking him to report for duty.
Ultimately, press note was got published in the Newspaper wherein the workman was directed to resume his duties within thirty days, failing which his services shall be terminated.
In the affidavit that was filed by the workman with his claim application all that he had mentioned was that due to threat of some anti-social elements, he could not join his duties at his place of posting.
There is not even a word mentioned as to what was the threat, when was the same given to him and as to whether while going on unsanctioned leave, he had ever mentioned this fact in his application seeking leave.
That apart, he did not even write to the management at any given time but for, as alleged by him, on May 19, 1985 that he was unable to join duties on account of threat given to him.
There is, thus, no justification pleaded by him in his claim application for remaining absent from duty for a period of more than two years.
As mentioned above, in his evidence led before the Labour Court, he only tendered his affidavit, reference of which has been given above, and in additional only stated that after his father had intimated him about the publication done in the Newspaper on May 19, 1985, he had immediately approached the SDE Circle, Ludhiana.
Even the Labour Court returned a finding on this crucial point that it was not where asserted by the workman that he had ever reported for duty or sent any communication to the department from February 4, 1984 to the date of issuing demand notice which was given on April 20, 1986.
The charge, on which the workman was retrenched, was thus provided to the hilt.
In these circumstances, the workman cannot urged that had there been an issue that he was absent from duty for a period of two years without any cause it should have been proved before the Labour Court.
That apart, this court in the exercise of powers conferred on it under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, is preliminary concerned with the dispensation of justice and it is not necessary, where there may be some infringement in law while retrenching the workman, to necessarily reinstate him with continuity of service, howsoever deplorable and blame worthy might be his conduct.
It will be too inequitous to foist upon the management a workman who had been guilty of gross misconduct for remaining absent for more than a period of two years without even informing it, without obtained leave of initial four days and for being absent there is some evidence to show that he had gone abroad.
6.
For the reasons recorded above, this petition succeeds.
Order Annexure P-3, passed by the Labour Court, Ludhiana, is quashed.
It is true that the Management passed the order of retrenchment on December 12, 1985 and made it effective from retrospective date when the workman had gone on unsanctioned leave.
Order to that extent is certainly bad but in the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case and particularly while considering that the workman actually did not work, he shall not be entitled to the wages of that period on the well known principle of 'No work no pay'.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.