VK Bali, J - Rahul Gupta through present petition filed by him under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, seeks writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to prepare the merit list of the candidates to be admitted in the sports category against 5% seats reserved for outstanding sportsmen for the M.B.A. programme of the respondent-University on the basis of the their achievements in sports and as per guidelines issued by the University itself.
The relief indicated above rests on the following facts.
2.
Petitioner has a brilliant academic record.
He passed his Matriculation examination securing 87% marks in 1987.
Thereafter, he did his 10+2 examination from DAV College, Chandigarh in Science group (non-medical) securing 90% marks in 1989.
Thereafter, he appeared in the Combined Entrance Test conducted by the respondent-University for the purpose of competing for admission to the Panjab Engineering College, Chandigarh.
He was admitted to BE (Electronics & Electrical Communication) course in the year 1989 on the basis of merit in the Combined Entrance Test in general category.
He successfully completed BE (Electronics & Electrical Communication) in June, 1993.
It is pleaded that it is not only that petitioner is outstanding in his studies but has taken keen interest in sports as well.
He plays the games of Hand Ball and Tennis.
He represented the college team in the game of Tennis and was awarded the College Colours from the Panjab Engineering College, Chandigarh.
He also participated in numerous National level championships in the game of Hand Ball.
He participated in the 16th Senior National Hand Ball Championship held from 10101987 to 18.10.1987.
Thereafter, he also participated in the 16th Senior National Hand Ball Championship held from 21121988 to 28.12.1988 at Rajasthan.
He also participated in the 3rd North Zone Hand Ball Championship held from 621991 to 9.2.1991 in Himachal Pradesh.
The Panjab University runs two years M.B.A. Programme at Chandigarh.
An advertisement was issued in December, 1992 inviting applications for the purpose of competing in the Entrance Test for being considered for admission in the MBA course for the Session 1993-94.
Bulletin for general information was also published which required all applicants to appear in the written test to be held at various centres all over India, every year.
Selected candidates, who were to qualify the written test, were to be called for interview and group discussion at Chandigarh.
The bulletin aforesaid also contained reservation for various seats.
The relevant portion of the same reads thus :-  "There is reservation of seats for Scheduled Caste (15%), Scheduled Tribe (7<$E1/2>%) and Backward Classes (5%) as per University regulation with concession of 5% marks in the aggregate; provided they satisfy the selection criteria.
Seats are also reserved for physically Handicapped (3%).
On the basis of achievement in sports (5%) as per University norms, Military personnel (upto 5%) as per University norms, for son/daughter/husband/wife/brother/sister of persons killed/incapacitated in terrorists violence in Panjab and Chandigarh (2%), provided they satisfy the selection criteria."
There is an important note and the same runs as follows :-  "For admission under any of the categories open or a Reserved, as given above, a candidate must be eligible.
Eligibility shall mean the candidates possessing minimum qualifications as laid down in the relevant regulations contained in the Panjab University Calender Volume II, 1988.
As admission to MBA, MPM & IR, MIB and MBA (PT) is based on an admission test, eligibility shall also mean the candidates having taken the test and qualified in it."
A perusal of the information bulletin would further show that there were in all thirty seats and 5% of the total seats were reserved to be filled up on the basis of achievements in sports as per University norms.
It is pleaded that the Panjab University had circulated guidelines for the purpose of admission to the reserved category of sports.
As per the norms laid down, the sportsmen are to be categorised in either of the categories i.e. A, B, C, or D There are various sub-categories also.
The inter-se merit as per clause 9 of the Guidelines, of the candidates seeking admission to any course under the reserved category of sports would be determined only on the basis of their merit in sports as per the grading given in the guidelines.
Obviously, a sportsmen having A-1 gradation would have precedence over a sportsman having A-2 gradation.
Petitioner, in consequence of the advertisement, applied for MBA programme before the last date fixed for the purpose.
He sought his admission in the reserved category of sportsmen.
He also appeared in the test conducted by the respondent-University on 28.2.1993.
The result of the test was published on the notice board of the University on 1241993.
However, when petitioner went to check up the same, he found that the result of only ten candidates had been displayed on the notice board and his name was not there in the said list.
On enquiries so made, he learnt that out of total thirty seats, 5% would be 15 and the same shall be treated to be two.
The respondents had declared result of five persons from the sports category against one seat and consequently declared the result of only ten persons, who were to be considered for admission against said two seats reserved for sports persons.
However, the ten persons, whose result was declared, happened to be those who had secured highest marks in the sports category in the Entrance Test.
He further learnt that it is only from amongst those ten persons that gradation would be seen in accordance with the instructions issued by the respondent-University and admissions would be made accordingly.
The ten persons were those who were short listed to be considered against two reserved vacancies purely on the basis of their score in the Entrance Test irrespective of their sports gradation.
It is only thereafter that the University was to arrange those ten names in accordance with their sports gradation.
After declaration of the result, petitioner met the Chairman-respondent No. 2 alongwith his father and explained him that in the sports category the admission has to be made strictly on the basis of achievements in sports.
It was sought to be explained to the Chairman that it was only grading in sports which has to be considered for admission and not the marks obtained in the Entrance Test.
However, the Chairman did not agree and rather stated that he would call for interview only first ten persons who secured highest marks in the Entrance Test.
Having failed to convince the Chairman, petitioner alongwith his father met the Registrar of the University which too brought no tengible results.
In these circumstances he has come to this Court asking for the relief as indicated in the earlier part of this judgment.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner contends that as per the instructions issued by the respondent-University, Annexure P-5, the admission in sports category has to be made on the basis of achievement in the sports and inasmuch as petitioner has the highest achievement in the sports amongst the candidates belonging to that category, the action of respondents in denying admission to him is arbitrary.
4.
Inasmuch as petitioner was not called for interview and the interview date still did not arrive, the Motion Bench while issuing notice of motion for 115.1993, ordered that petitioner may be interviewed but the result be not declared.
While admitting this petition on 2851993, the bench considering the fact that the matter pertains to admission, ordered to list the petition in the first week of July, 1993.
One seat was ordered to be kept reserved for petitioner in the sports category.
5.
The cause of petitioner has been opposed and in the written statement that has been filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2 by Shri Bidhi Chand, Chairman, Department of Commerce and Business Management, it has been pleaded by way of preliminary objections that petitioner had designedly misstated material facts in order to secure notice of motion and interim relief.
He did not apply under the sports category and column 4 of the Application Form which was specifically designed for the candidates belonging to Sports category, shows that petitioner had not sought admission on the basis of sports achievements.
He had specifically stated that he did not belong to the said category.
The aforesaid column further requires the candidate to attach relevant certificates showing sports excellence and as petitioner had not sought consideration under the said category, he did not attach any certificate alongwith his application form.
His name also did not appear in the separate list prepared for sports category.
The list was sent to the Examining Body of the University which conducts the written tests.
On merits of the case it has been pleaded in the written statement that there was no mention in the application form that petitioner had participated in the 16th Senior National Hand Ball Championship held from 10101987 to 18.10.1987.
It is also denied that he participated in the 16th Senior National Hand Ball Championship held from 21121988 to 28.12.1988.
Similarly, it is stated, that there was no mention of participation of petitioner in the 3rd North Zone Hand Ball Championship held from 621991 to 9.2.1991 in Himachal Pradesh.
The certificates issued to the petitioner were not attached with the application form as he never claimed to be considered under the reserved category of outstanding sportsmen.
Insofar as the guidelines issued by the University governing the admissions of sports persons, are concerned, the case of respondents is that academic excellence of a candidate can not be completely ignored and it is only those sports persons who are amongst first ten i.e. five times the seats in the category of sports in the Entrance Test who are considered according to their sports excellence.
In the written test that was conducted by the University, petitioner ranked at serial No. 359 in the general category as he had secured 5167 marks out of 86.
The last person called for interview ranking at serial No. 99 had secured 5795 marks.
The last person amongst the ten persons called for interview from the sports category had secured 5352 marks.
It is pleaded that petitioner did not deserve admission as the persons higher in merit were available.
6.
Petitioner, with the permission of this Court, filed replication controverting basically the preliminary objections raised in the written statement.
His case is that he did not suppress any material facts from this court.
He was duly considered for admission in the sports category.
He, however, admits that Annexure R-1 is his application form which was filled and submitted by him on the last date.
While going through column 4, he read it as if it pertained to reserved categories of Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe.
On the glance to column 4 he formed an impression that the same was meant for Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe and Backward Classes.
It was simply on account of over-sight that he missed the column No. 4 for outstanding sportsmen and it was only because of that reason that he mentioned word 'No'.
However, in part 'C' where extra curricular activities were to be mentioned, he duly mentioned that he had represented the State as a team member in the game of Hand Ball.
He was sure that he would be considered against sports category.
However, when it came to his notice that there is same mistake made by him in the form sent by him and he should have ticked in column 4, he immediately approached the Department of Commerce and Business Management and an official in the department dealing with the application forms told him that he should submit representation to the Chairman of the Department for getting his name considered in the sports category.
Accordingly, he submitted representation to the Chairman, Department of Commerce and Business Management within a period of week or ten days from the date of submission of the application form.
When the Chairman, however, did not give him any encouraging response, he alongwith his father met the Registrar of the University and explained his predicament.
He was told by the Registrar that he would get it confirmed from the Department concerned as to whether or not he should be considered in the sports category.
Subsequently, Registrar informed him that his application was actually considered in the sports category.
Since the test was to be conducted by an agency from Calcutta, the Registrar also informed petitioner that as per information conveyed to him by the department on telephone, telegram had been sent to that agency and that his name would be considered in the sports category.
However, after the result of the Entrance Test was declared, he came to know that only first ten candidates from the sports category as per their merit in the Entrance Test were to be considered for admission.
He again met the Chairperson.
It was at that stage that the Chairperson told him that it is only first ten persons who would be considered on merits.
There were inall 105 applicants in the sports category and after the name of petitioner was included in the said category, the total number went to 106.
Out of above 106 persons of the sports category, name of petitioner figured at serial No. 16.
With regard to his not attaching certificates that were awarded to him on account of his sports excellence with the application form, it is pleaded that perusal of column 4 would manifest that only in those cases certificates were to be attached where reservation was claimed on the basis of Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe/Backward Classes and no certificate was required to be attached as per column 4 by outstanding sports persons/Defence Personnel/their dependents/riot victims or any other.
Instruction 'C' on the contrary clearly spells out that no certificates had to be attached with the form except for (i) Reserved category certificate and (ii) Character certificate.
7.
The Registrar of the University, Mr. BL Gupta, has also filed separate reply wherein it has been pleaded that petitioner had not applied for admission to MBA course under the reserved category of sportsmen.
However, it is admitted that he met him sometimes in the first week of February, 1993 and requested that the application form submitted by his through the Department of Commerce and Business Management on 25.1.1993 be got corrected and his name be considered in the sports category in column No. 4 (reserved category).
Since the rest was being arranged by the said department at their own level and the application forms were also being processed by them, he (Registrar) told the petitioner that he should make written request in that behalf to the Department of Commerce and Business Management and he would in turn ask them to consider his application.
Simultaneously, he told the Deputy Registrar in the said department that claim of petitioner be considered and appropriate action be taken as per Rules.
This is the only difference in the written statements filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2 through Prof. Bidhi Chand and the Registrar of the University.
The Registrar has, however, resisted the claim of petitioner on other grounds that have been detailed while dealing with the written statement filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2.
8.
The Chairman, Department of Commerce and Business Management sought permission of the Court to file reply to the re-joinder filed by petitioner and the same was allowed.
In the reply aforesaid it has been pleaded that the record of the department concerned shall be produced before this Court and the same will speak for itself.
The assertion of petitioner that he claimed his consideration in the sports category has been denied.
It is further denied that petitioner ever met him or any of the officials of the said department.
9.
On the basis of pleadings that have been noticed above, Mr. MM Kumar, learned counsel for the respondents, vehemently contends that petitioner never applied under the category of sports persons.
He never sought permission or requested to change his category from general to that of sportsmen nor was such change permissible after the last date of receipt of application forms was over.
He further contends that the sports excellence in admission to MBA Programme could not be the sole criteria and the academic performance of the students that was to be basically judged in the Entrance Test, could not be ignored.
10.
In order to determine this controversy, it has first to be found as to whether the petitioner ever applied for admission in MBA Programme in the reserved category of sports persons or that his application was from amongst the candidates belonging to general category.
Before, however, a definite finding is recorded on the crucial issue aforesaid, it would be pertinent to mention that the respondents have no where denied the claim of petitioner that he had participated in Senior National Hand Ball Championships at State level.
During the course of arguments, this Court sent for the original records of the case.
The application form submitted by petitioner depicts that against column 4, which reads "Do you belong to any of the following reserved categorises?
If yes, tick the category you belong to : "petitioner has mentioned 'No'.
The reserved categories have been indicated in a box.
Whereas the reserved categories i.e.
Scheduled Caste, Scheduled Tribe and Backward Classes mentioned before the box, have one star below them, the reserved category of physically handicapped before the box has two stars beneath it.
The reserved categories of outstanding sportspersons/defence personnel/their dependents/riot victims and any other mentioned before the boxes, against each one of them, have no star beneath them.
Before column No. 4 ends, one star (*) and two stars (**) have been explained as follows :-  * If yes, please attach a certificate from a Revenue Officer of the District concerned not below the rank of a Tehsildar.
It must bear the official SEAL of the Revenue Officer.
** If yes, please attach a Medical Certificate from a Medical Officer.
Note : In the absence of the above certificate/s no consideration will be given to your claim."
Clause 'C' of the instructions detailed in the application form itself reads thus :-  "(C) Please do not attach any certificates/testimonials/documents (Either original or copies) with this form except.
(1) Reserved Category Certificate (Part A Sr.No.
4)  ii) Character Certificate (Part E Sr. No. 3).
In part 'C' of the form aforesaid, which pertains to extra curricular activities, petitioner against column 1(a) has tick marked the box.
The said clause is with regard to a person who plays games regularly.
In column 1(b) which is with regard to the games and level of participation, petitioner has mentioned 'Tennis' and he has tick marked the column with regard to representing the college as team member whereas in clause (ii) he has mentioned another game played by him as 'Handball' and he has also tick marked the column with regard to representing the college as team member as also the State.
Whereas, perusal of his application form show that against column 4 pertaining to a person belonging to reserved category, he has mentioned 'No', in part 'C' pertaining to extra curricular activities, he has clearly mentioned both Tennis and Handball and the level of his representing his college.
He had represented his college at the State level.
It is further made out from the application form and various columns that have been fully detailed above that certificate was to be attached only if one was belonging to Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe/Backward Classes or was physically handicapped as is clearly made out from the reading of column 4 as also clause 'C' of the instructions that have mentioned above.
In part 'C', however, clause 1(b) also mentions that if the reply to clause 1(a) is yes, then a candidate has to list the games and the level of participation and attach proof thereof.
A very peculiar situation is in offing in the present case.
The positive case of petitioner that he was misled to mention word 'No' against column 4 on account of the nature of form and did not attach his certificates as it was specifically mentioned not to do so, appears to be correct.
Column 4 of the application form has been depicted as mentioned below :-  "4.
Do you belong to any of the following reserved categories?
If yes, tick the category you belong to :  Scheduled Caste ---- Scheduled Tribe ----  Backward Class ----  Physically Handicapped ----  Outstanding Sportsperson ----  Defence Personnel/Their Dependents ----  Riot Victims ----  Any other ---- Please specify.
* If yes, please attach a certificate from a Revenue Officer of the District concerned not below the rank of a Tehsildar.
It must bear the official SEAL of the Revenue Officer.
** If yes, please attach a Medical Certificate from a Medical Officer.
Note :- In the absence of the above Certificate/s no consideration will be given to your claim."
As mentioned above, there is separate column with regard to extra curricular activities and the first item of part 'C' pertains to sports.
Inasmuch as the certificates were to be attached as per column 4 only with regard to the reserved categories under which there was one or two stars and as per clause 'C' of the instructions, no certificate was to be attached with the form except reserved category certificate of Part A Sr. No. 4 which pertains to category of physically handicapped persons.
Petitioner, thus, was misled to believe that column 4 was only meant for the persons belonging to Scheduled Caste, Scheduled Tribe, Backward Classes and Physically Handicapped.
That apart, more important question is as to whether a citizen and particularly student who otherwise deserves admission on merits, should be denied the same on account of mistakes made by him?
I am of the considered view that if the mistakes are bona fide, correction whereof is prayed for at appropriate time and in any case before the admissions are finalised, it would be the duty of the authorities concerned to correct the same so as to advance the cause of justice by giving admission to those who deserve it on merits.
Strict adherence to technicalities by not permitting corrections that might throttle the cause of justice, does not commend to this Court.
There is nothing like recognising merit, if the same can be done without jeopardising the cause of others.
The same should be done before the rights of others get crystallised.
That being the view of this Court, it shall have now to be seen as to whether the petitioner brought to the notice of the authorities to change his category from general to that of reserved category of sportspersons.
Once again strange situation is in the offing.
Whereas, the Registrar is emphatic in saying that petitioner did meet him and prayed that he had made mistake in mentioning word 'No' against column 4 and that his category be changed to that of reserved category of sportspersons, the Chairperson of the department concerned has emphatically denied the same.
The Court after scrutinising the pleadings of the parties can neither doubt the conflicting, although emphatic, stands taken by the Registrar and the Chairperson of the department concerned.
In view of the peculiar facts of this case, the only possible conclusion is that petitioner did meet atleast the Registrar but on account of some communication gap the Chairperson did not forward his case to quarters concerned for correction and to change his category from that of general to that of sportsperson.
That, however, cannot come in the way of giving admission to petitioner if he otherwise deserves it on merits.
The plea of respondents that after the date for submission of application forms is over, a candidate cannot be permitted to change his category, is not, however fortified.
The perusal of the records shows that one Rajiv Budhiraja was brought from general category to sports category even after the written test was published.
The said candidate had secured 5822. marks.
He had been shown in the general category at serial No. 89.
The general category has been scored out with hand and against it 'sports' has been mentioned again in hand.
Likewise, in the sports category, his name was not earlier there at all and was mentioned in hand before the first person i.e. Ashish Banga.
There is no such pleading nor it possibly could be and there is no reply as well for obvious reasons, but the record that was summoned by the Court does depict the above said change.
It, thus, cannot be said that in no circumstances category of candidate can be changed as it is demonstrated from the facts of this very case that one Rajiv Budhiraja, after the result was published, was brought from general category to sports category.
11.
As noticed above, whereas the stand of petitioner is that as per University guidelines, admission of sportspersons has necessarily to depend upon the excellence in sports and as per grading to be done in accordance with the guidelines, the stand of respondents is that in a course like MBA, which is a technical course, excellence in support can not be the sole criteria for admission and one has, thus, to have some minimum standard commensurate to the course in question.
With a view to answer this question, the admission criteria has to be scrutinised.
The information bulletin, reference of which has been given above, clearly spells out that admission is based on the competence of applicants judged by the authorities in the written test, interview and group discussion.
All applicants have to appear in the written test and selected candidates who qualify the written test, have to be called for interview and group discussion, The test is designed to measure the candidates ability and knowledge for success in higher education and management.
It includes the test of verbal reasoning, numerical ability, breadth of knowledge, English, Data interpretation, Economic/Business Environment, Awareness and problem solving.
It would, thus, be made out from the information bulletin, Annexure P_4, that a candidate has necessarily to qualify the written test.
This would be true even with regard to the candidates who belong to reserved categories.
Mr. PS Patwalia, learned counsel for petitioner, however, contends that insofar as the person belonging to sports category are concerned, the result of the written test is meaningless as in the said category, admission has to be governed in accordance with the University norms as mentioned in the Information Bulletin itself.
He further argues that the condition of satisfying the selection criteria is meant only for those who are in reserved categories of Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe and Backward Classes as also for the reserved categories like, Military personnel, their sons and daughters etc. but not for the persons belonging to the reserved category of sports.
12.
The contention of Mr. Patwalia has, however, no substance.
After reading the information bulletin in its all details, the Court is of the considered view that condition to satisfy the selection criteria is there for all reserved categories.
The relevant part of Annexure P-4 has been reproduced in the earlier part of this judgment and a perusal thereof would show that after the words 'Physically Handicapped (3%) there is full stop.
With regard to the persons belonging to reserved category of sports, the sentence is as follows :-  "On the basis of achievement in sports (5%) as per University norms, Military personnel (up to 5%) as per University norms, for son/daughter/husband/wife/brother/sister of persons killed/incapacitated in November, 1984 riots and of persons killed/incapacitated in terrorist violence in Punjab and Chandigarh (2%) : provided they satisfy the selection criteria."
The selection criteria is, thus, embodied in all reserved categories.
It is true that those who have been selected or have satisfied the selection criteria in the reserved category of sports, their achievement is to be governed as per University norms and it is not disputed that the norms are the same as have been provided in Annexure P-5.
The guidelines for admission to the reserved category of sports, as made out in Annexure P-5, would clearly demonstrate that a person higher in grade in sports has to be preferred over the one whose grade is lower.
It is not disputed that petitioner actually appeared in the written test and secured 5167 marks out of 86.
It cannot, thus, be said that he did not satisfy the selection criteria insofar as atleast it pertains to written test.
However, as the facts of the case reveal, he was not called for interview as the respondents thought it proper to consider only ten first candidates in the reserved category of sports.
Can such be the selection criteria is yet another question which has also to be answered.
Before, however, that is done, a finding has to be returned that a candidate seeking admission is to answer the minimum selection standard and it is only that person who has done so, can be considered for admission whatever may be his gradation or achievements in sports.
The view that I have taken in the matter, was also taken by the Full Bench of this Court in Amardeep Singh Sahota v. The State of Punjab, 1993(2) PLR 212 : 1993(4) SCT 328 (P&H) (FB) wherein it was held," that the students pursuing courses in medical or engineering colleges, which are technical subjects, require an academic mind, as ultimately after obtaining degrees from these professional colleges, they serve humanity.
Policy of the Government laying down the sole criterion for admission as sports cannot be countenanced.
It would be against public interest and wholly arbitrary.
Excellence in sports may be a very important consideration for admission in the sports quota but a certain minimum academic standard is also required to enable the students to obtain degree."
13.
Coming to the selection criteria as adopted by the respondent-University i.e. sending for interview and group discussion only ten top candidates i.e. those who have secured highest marks in the sports category in the context of the facts of this case as also the stark reality that a substantial number of students apply in many branches, in many Institutions and in many States and ultimately decide, after finalisation of all examinations as to where they have to join, does not appear to be realistic.
In the present scenario, on account of many students even not ultimately joining after selection, respondents ought to have sent more students for interview and group discussion after written test or should have fixed minimum criteria for selection.
The short listing of students i.e. calling five times students than the seats that are available, would be turning away from the realities and in many cases it would confront the authorities with such situation that the effort of calling five times students would not materialise.
A minimum percentage, as thought fit by the experts, has, thus, to be fixed as selection criteria and it is only thereafter that precedence has to be given to the sportspersons as per their grading in the sports, as per University norms.
The facts of this case are sufficient to hold that sending of five times candidates of the seats available for interview and group discussion, is ignoring the realities and, thus, borders on arbitrariness.
It is not disputed that out of ten candidates called for interview and group discussion, only eight had appeared.
All eight candidates were sent for grading them as per their sports achievements in compliance with the guidelines issued by the University.
Two candidates were found to be so who could not get any grading and their case for admission in the sports category was as such rejected on the count only.
Out of six candidates left out in the field, only three appeared for trial in their respective sports and three even did not come so that their sports ability could be decided.
In the manner aforesaid, out of ten persons sent for interview and group discussion, only three were left out in the field.
This in itself demonstrates that the criteria of calling five times students than the seats available in a particular category, is wholly unrealistic.
It is in this context, as observed earlier, it has to be held that a minimum qualifying standard for each category has to be fixed.
Petitioner was not even called for interview and group discussion and, thus, it cannot be said that he did not answer the selection standard, if at all any such was fixed for interview and group discussion.
14.
For the reasons mentioned above, this petition is allowed.
A direction is issued to the respondents to consider the case of petitioner for admission in M.B.A. course on the basis of his sports gradation and in that context to put him under test as well, as was done in the case of others by calling them to test their sports abilities.
If his sports credentials are confirmed in the test that may be put to him, he shall be admitted in the course under contention as he had answered the selection criteria and thereafter as per the standard of the University itself, the grading in sports has to be seen.
On account of peculiar facts and circumstances of this case, parties are left to bear their own costs.
15.
Before I part with this judgment, I would like to mention that this Court has been informed that one person has since already been admitted whereas second seat in the category of sports has not been filled on account of stay granted by this Court.
Obviously, there has now to be competition between petitioner and the one who might be second in the merit list as per selection made by the respondents.
If the petitioner might have higher grading in sports from the one who has been kept in the waiting list all this while, on account of his sports gradation, he has necessarily to be preferred.
However, if the University might think it proper, it may admit as well the one who has been kept in wings for considerable length of period in, all the hopes, that he might as well get admission.
Strong recommendation is made by this Court to the respondent-authorities to accommodate him as well so that his aspirations are not frustrated, even if for that purpose an additional seat has to be created.