Shivaraj Patil, J - All these appellants were writ petitioners in Writ Petition Nos. 1877 to 1881 of 1988.
The Writ Petitions were filed praying for the following reliefs :  (A) Issue a writ of certiorari or any other appropriate writ, order or direction quashing the Civil List (Gradation List) in the cadre of Assistant Accounts Officers as on 171987 under the Notification dated 1491987 bearing No. Nil issued by the 1st respondent, produced herewith at Annexure-C, in so far as it relates to the rankings assigned to them at Sl.
Nos. 36, 39 and 42 to 44 respectively;  (B) Issue a writ in the nature of mandamus or any other appropriate order, writ or direction directing the respondents 1 and 2 to prepare a fresh Gradation List in the Cadre of Assistant Accounts Officers in accordance with the principles laid down in Gonal Bhimappa v. The State of Karnataka, reported in 1987(4) SLR 526 (SC) and also in VB Badami v. The State of Karnataka, reported in AIR 1980 SC 1516.
(C) Issue a writ in the nature of mandamus or any other appropriate writ, order or direction further directing respondents 1 and 2 to consider their cases for promotion to the next higher cadres of Accounts Officers and Deputy Controllers of accounts as and when the respondents 3 to 14 were promoted to the same and if found eligible, to give them proforma promotions to the said cadres with retrospective effect awarding all the consequential benefits flowing therefrom including the monetary benefits.
(D) Order costs of these writ petitions and such other and further appropriate orders in the interest of justice and equity.
2.
The appellant contended that they were appointed as Direct Recruits to the post of Assistant Accounts Officers in the Karnataka Electricity Board (for short 'the Board') as per order dated 2111977 along with five others; they satisfactorily completed the probation period of two years; the employees of the Board are governed by the Karnataka Electricity Board Recruitments and Promotions of the Board Service Regulations, 1960 (for short the Regulations); the said Regulations came into force with effect from 521960; the mode of recruitment of the post of Assistant Accounts Officer, is from two sources one by promotion and another by Direct Recruitment in the quota prescribed for each category; there has been variation from time to time in the percentage of quota fixed for each of the category and with effect from 1031976 the quota for Direct Recruitment and by promotion was fixed at 20% and 80% respectively.
Respondents 3 to 14 were promoted to the cadre of Assistant Accounts Officers between the period 1967 and 1969 from the cadre of First Division Clerks.
Their promotion to the cadre of Assistant Accounts Officers was in excess of the Quota Rules prevailing during the relevant period.
When this was the position the Board prepared the Gradation List of the Assistant Accounts Officers as on 111980 showing the names of the appellants of Sl.
Nos. 160, 164 and 167 to 169 respectively.
Objections were called for to the, said Gradation List.
The appellants and similarly placed persons filed their objections on 17111980 contending that the Quota Rules was not followed; the Gradation List did not reflect the proper ranking of their seniority and that the principles laid down in the case of VB Badami v. State of Mysore and others, AIR 1980 SC 1561 were not followed.
Thereafter another Gradation List was prepared as on 1.11.1983 showing the names of the appellants at Sl.
Nos. 77, 81 and 84 to 86 respectively.
Even to this Gradation List the appellants did file objections.
No final Gradation List was prepared and published thereafter.
Yet again, on 171987 the Board prepared and published the Gradation List on 141987 showing the names of the appellants at Sl.
Nos. 36, 39 and 42 to 44 respectively.
Respondents 3 to 14 in view of their promotion to the cadre of Assistant Accounts Officer between 1967 and 1969, in violation of the Quota Rule, were further promoted to the next higher cadre of Accounts Officer and some of them Deputy Controller of Accounts.
Thus, in short, the appellants conceded that the promotions of respondents 3 to 14 made in violation of the Quota Rule governing them and placing them above the petitioners in seniority list, were in violation of the Regulations and as such they filed the writ petitions on 121988 praying for the reliefs as stated above.
3.
On behalf of the Board Statement of objections was filed.
The stand of the Board is clear from what is stated in para 5 of the statement of objections, which reads thus :  "Admittedly respondents 3 to 14 were promoted as AAO between 1967 and 1969 at which time none of the petitioners were even in the employment or service of these respondents.
The petitioners are, therefore, not entitled in law to challenge such promotions.
Between 1967-1969, the basis for recruitment was on the basis of 25% by direct recruitment and 75% by promotion.
Between 1.10.57 to 4.2.60 there were no vacancies in the posts of AAOs.
However, from 4.2.1960 to 3071965 the number of vacancies in the posts of AAO were 21.
Of this in accordance with the regulations in force at that time, the promotion quota was 75%, viz. 16 posts and direct recruitment quota viz. 5 posts after calling for applications for recruitment of AAOs these respondents appointed 12 Probationary Accounts Superintendents (now called AAO) even though the quota for direct recruitment was one  5.
Consequently, the appointment of Accounts Superintendents was in excess of the quota resulting in the postponement of promotions to the Assistant who but for such excess direct appointments would have been entitled to their promotion.
Therefore, the petitioners cannot, by virtue of their being direct recruits, voice any complaint, against the excess appointments made, as the only class of persons, entitled to object were the promotees, whose quota had been encroached upon.
It, therefore, follows that in any event in so far as the petitioners, are concerned the violation to the extent narrated of the quota rule was in their favour and therefore, any violation of the quota rule adversely affecting the petitioners does not raise.
The persons so appointed in excess of the quota for direct recruitment were regularised, as and when vacancies arose.
Such regularisation was completed by 1968 viz., long prior to the petitioners being appointed."
4.
The learned single Judge having considered the contentions raised and submissions made by the learned counsel appearing for the parties dismissed the Writ Petitions by the impugned order dated 2191990, in that the learned single Judge relied on the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of The Direct Recruit Class-II Engineering Officers' Association and others v. State of Maharashtra and others, 1990(2) SLR 769 (SC).
This is what the learned single Judge has stated in para 6 of the impugned order :  "There is serious dispute between the parties as to the vacancies available on relevant dates.
However it is unnecessary to examine that aspect of the matter in view of the decision of the Supreme Court in the Direct Recruit Class-II Engineer Officers Association and others v. State of Maharashtra and others, 1990(2) SLR 769 (SC) where it has been laid down that when appointments were made from more than one source it is permissible to fix the ratio for recruitment from different sources and if rules are framed in that regard they should ordinarily be followed strictly.
But if direct recruitment is not done continuously for long number of years it becomes impossible to adhere to the existing quota it should be substituted by appropriate rule to meet the needs of the situation.
In cases however the quota rule is not followed continuously for a number of years because it was impossible to do so, the inference is irresistible that the quota rule had broke down.
Where the quota rule had broken down and appointments are made from one source in excess of the quota but in conformity with eligibility rules and not on ad hoc basis the appointees should not be pushed down below the appointees from the other source induced into service at a later date."
The learned Judge proceeded on the ground that there has been a break down of the Quota Rule in view of the fact that there has not been recruitment between 1965 to 1977 and as such held that the said decision of the Supreme Court was applicable to the facts of the cases on hand.
In the view he took, dismissed the Writ Petitions.
Hence Writ Appeals.
5.
The learned counsel appearing for the appellants urged that the learned single judge was not right applying the said decision of the Supreme Court in the case of District Recruit Class-II Engineering Officers Association contending that in the objection statement filed by the Board it is not stated as to how and under what circumstances there has been break down of the Quota Rule and no material was placed on record to show that it was impossible for the Board to make direct recruitment of Assistant Accounts Officer, during the period of 1965 to 1977.
In the absence of such material and the stand taken by the Board, the case of Direct Recruit Class-II Engineering Officers' Association has no application to the facts of the cases on hand.
They also further submitted that the said decision advances appellants cases if carefully considered.
In particular our attention was drawn to para 44 of the said decision.
They also placed reliance on a decision of the Division Bench of this court in the case of VB Badami and others v. State of Mysore and others, 1975(2) SIR 295 (Karnataka) : 1975(1) Karnataka Law Journal 356.
In parallel of the said decision it is stated that :  "If however, promotions are made to vacancies in excess of the promotion quota, the promotions may not be totally illegal but would certainly be irregular and the promotees cannot claim any indefeasible right to hold the promotional posts; on the contrary, they will be liable to be reverted if and when direct recruitment is resorted to for the purpose of filling the vacancies in excess of the promotional quota which, by virtue of the provision under the relevant rules, are requited to be filled by direct recruitment.
The said liability for reversion is one of the elements or circumstances to be noticed in deciding the relative seniority as between direct recruits on the one hand and the promotees on the other."
In the same decision in para 22 it is stated thus :  "What is stated above is one aspect of the question.
The other aspect is what is the reasonable period to be taken into account for the purposes of determining whether the promotions are within the quota or in excess of the quota or, in other words, what is the period the permanent vacancies arising in which furnish the basis for calculating the number to be filled by promotion and the number to be filled by direct recruitment.
The guidance in this regard must be sought in the rules.
If the rules provide such guidance, then the period must be determined on the basis thereof; otherwise, the period of one year mentioned in Clauses (b) and (c) of Rules 17 of the General Recruitment Rules should, in our opinion, be regarded as a reasonable period."
They also cited the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of VB Badami v. State of Mysore and others, AIR 1980 SC 1561.
Having considered the quota rule the Supreme Court has observed that -  "The promoters cannot claim a right to hold the promotional posts unless the vacancies fall within their quota.
If the promotees occupy any vacancies which are within the quota of direct recruits, when direct recruitment takes place, the direct recruits will occupy the vacancies within their quota.
Promotees who were occupying the vacancies within the quota of direct recruits will either be reverted or they will be absorbed in the vacancies within their quota in the facts and circumstances of a case."
It is clearly stated thus in para 34 of the said decision :  The important principle is that as long as the quota rule remains neither promotees can be allotted to any of the substantive vacancies of the quota of direct recruits nor directed recruits can be allotted to promotional vacancies.
The result is that direct recruitment vacancies between 11 September, 1959 and 26 October, 1964 cannot be occupied by any promotees.
The fact that direct recruits were confirmed on 26 October 1964 will not rob the direct recruits of their quota which remained unfilled from 2 December, 1957."
Yet, another decision of the Supreme Court was cited by the learned counsel for the appellants in support of their submissions of the case of Gonal Bhimappa v. State of Karnataka and others, 1987(4) SLR 526 (SC).
A similar question came up for consideration in the said decision as can be seen from the facts stated in para 2.
In this case the Supreme Court having considered various decisions on the point and in particular the decisions in the case of SC Jaisinghani v Union of India, 1967 SLR 482 SC and Badami's case on which reference is already made, has stated thus is para 10 :  "Badami's (AIR 1980 SC 1561) referred to several authorities of the Court and clearly drew the judicial consensus on the point in issue by concluding that the quota rule had to be strictly enforced and it was not open to the authorities to meddle with it on the ground of administrative exigencies."
It is reiterated in para 15 of the said decision in categorical terms that :  "The conclusion of this Court in Badami's case on this score is a binding authority on us, from an examination of the matter we also reiterate that conclusion to be correct."
Again in para-23 of the said decision the Supreme Court preceded to say :  "The net result of the discussion above requires that rule in Badami's case (AIR 1980 SC 1561) has to be give full effect.
The appeals and writ petitions of the direct recruits have to succeed and those by the promotees have to fail.
We hope and trust that the State of Karnataka will not demote anyone who has been in a promotional post for several years to the Class-II service as a consequence of this decision but the Gradation List has got to be adjusted to fit into the principles indicated in the judgment.
No justification was shown to us as to why the State of Karnataka failed to comply with its obligation of making recruitments in terms of the quota.
Once the State frames rules they are binding on the State and like individuals the State has got to regulate its conduct in accordance with the rules nay, the State has to observe it all the more.
We hope and trust that the State of Karnataka in the years ahead will comply with the quota rule with regularity so that a litigation of this type may not arise again.
If any part has to be directed or payment of costs in this bunch of litigation it must be the State.
We, however, do not want to saddle the State with costs for two reasons firstly, we do not want the employees to have a feeling that in the fight their employer has been vanquished and secondly we entertain a fond hope that there will be no reoccurrence."
Finally, they also cited the decision in the case of the Direct Recruit Class-II Engineering Officers' Association and others v. State of Maharashtra and others, 1990(2) SLR 769 (SC) on which the learned single Judge placed reliance to dismiss the writ petitions.
The learned Counsel for the appellants contended that said decision helps the cases of the appellants and not of the respondents.
In particular they drew our attention to paras 19, 21, 22, 23 and 44 of the said decision.
In para 19 of the said decision reference is made to the cases of Jaisighani, Badami and Patwardhan.
In para 21 the Supreme Court has expressed thus :  "The question, however, is as to what is the conclusion if the quota rule is not followed at all continuously for a number of years, after it becomes impossible to adhere to the same.
Admittedly in the present cases, direct recruits were not available in adequate number for appointment and appropriate candidates in the subordinate rank capable of efficiently discharging the duties of Deputy Engineers were waiting in their queue.
The development work of the State pre-emptiorily required experience and efficient hands.
In the situation the State Government took a decision to fill up the vacancies by promotion in excess of the quota but only after subjecting the officers to line test prescribed by the rules."
(emphasis supplied)  Reading of paras 22 and 23 of the judgment makes it clear that the quota rule had to be followed as laid down in Badmi's case.
There can be an exceptional circumstance in which there could be deviation in the matter of following the quota rule, if the Rules provide for the relaxation of the quota rule or due to some circumstances where it became impossible to make direct recruitment for number of years so as to follow the quota rule strictly and that quota rule had broken down.
The Supreme Court in the said decision has recorded its conclusions in para 44, sub-para (A) to (K), but for the purpose of the cases on hand we think it appropriate to extract Sub-paras (C) to (E), which read thus :  "(C) When appointments are made from more than one source, it is permissible to fix the ratio for recruitment from the different sources and if rules are framed in this regard they must ordinarily be followed strictly.
(D) If it becomes impossible to adhere to the existing quota rule, it should be substituted by an appropriate rule to meet the needs of the situation.
In case, however, the quota rule is not followed continuously for a number of years because it was impossible to do so the inference is irresistible that the quota rule had broken down.
(E) Where the quota rule has broken down and the appointments are made from one source in excess of the quota, but are made after following the procedure prescribed by the rules for appointment, the appointees should not be pushed down below the appointees from the other source inducted in the service at a later date."
Thus, in view of the legal position stated and explained in the decision the appellants contend that their writ petitions ought to have been allowed granting the reliefs sought for.
6.
Per contra, learned counsel appearing for the respondents, argued in support and justification of the impugned order.
They urged that :  (1) The writ petitioners are not entitled for any relief on the ground of delay and latches, inasmuch as they have sought to question the promotions of the respondents made as clearly as between the year 1967 and 1969 by filing Writ Petitions in 1988.
(2) Disturbing the order of seniority at this stage, after lapse of several years, would result in great hardship to the promotee-respondents.
(3) There was no recruitment between 1965 and 1977 for a period of 12 years.
That being the position it should be taken that the quota rule had broke down and the quota rule cannot have universal application.
There may be circumstances and cases justifying the deviation from following the quota rule.
Under the circumstances, the writ petitions were rightly dismissed.
The learned counsel for the respondents have also cited few decisions in support of their contentions.
7.
In order to appreciate and apply the decisions cited by the learned counsel for the respondents, it is necessary to bear in mind that the Board in the statement of objections filed, has not laid foundation to say as to what were the circumstances under which they could not make direct recruitment between 1965 and 1977.
It is also not possible, from reading the statement of objections to infer that it was impossible for the Board to give effect to the quota rule.
It is not disputed that the Gradation Lists pertaining to the Assistant Accounts Officers, were prepared in 1980, 1983 and 1987 from time to time.
Whenever Gradation List was published objections were invited.
The appellants as contended by them in the writ petition filed their objections and the last of the Gradation List was published on 1491987.
The writ petitions were filed on 121988.
On these undisputed facts, we are not able to agree with the learned counsel for the respondents that there has been delay on the part of the appellants in filing the writ petitions.
In view of the conclusions reached by the Supreme Court in para 44 in the case of Direct Recruit Class-II Engineering Officers' Association, it is not possible to agree with the contention advanced on behalf of the respondents that the quota rule had broken down.
In order to attract the said decision to the case on hand, it is necessary for the respondents to establish that it was impossible to adhere to the quota rule and to make direct recruit for number of years.
In the statement of objections filed by the Board there is nothing to indicate as to what were the circumstances under which it was not possible to make direct recruitment between the period 1965 and 1977 and that the quota rule had broken down on that account.
The Board being public authority in all fairness ought to have followed it own Regulations in order to give effect to the quota rule so as to appropriate the vacancies between the direct recruits and the promotees.
Under the circumstances, we do not appreciate the action of the Board in the absence of placing material on record, to show why it was not possible to make direct recruitment for number of years and that it was impossible to adhere to the quota rule in the matter of making direct recruitment.
8.
The argument advanced on behalf of the respondents that the promotees would be put to great hardship in case their seniority is disturbed at this stage, finds compete answer in paragraph 19 of the judgment in the case of Gonal Bimappa (supra).
A portion in the said paragraph reads thus :  "In the present batch of cases of law being clear and particularly the mandate in the rule being that when recruitment take place the promotee has to make room for the direct recruit, every promotee in such a situation would not be entitled to claim any further benefit than the advantage or being in a promotional post not due to him but yet filled by him in the absence of a direct recruit.
One aspect which we consider relevant to bear in mind is that the promoted officer has got the advantage of having been promoted before it became his due and is not being made to lose his promotional position.
The dispute is confined to one of seniority only.
The advantage received by the promotee before his chance opened should be balanced against his forfeiture of claim to seniority.
If the matter is looked at from that angle there would be no scope for heart-burning or at any rate dissatisfaction is expected to be reduced so far as the promotees are concerned."
The learned counsel for the respondents cites few decisions in support of their argument that quota rule need not have universal application the failure to follow the quota rule under the given set of circumstances should not invalidate the appointments of the promotees and that there can be deviation in following the quota rule when there is break down of quota rule.
Most of the decisions cited by the learned counsel are referred to in the cases of Gonal Bhimappa and District Recruit Class-II Engineering Officers' Association in our opinion, the principles laid down in Badami's case touching the question remain reinforced.
9.
It is clearly stated in the decision in Direct Recruit Class-II Engineering Officers Association that :  "If it becomes impossible to adhere to the existing quota rule it should be substituted by an appropriate rule to meet the needs of the situation.
In case, however, the quota rule is not followed continuously for a number of years because it was impossible to do so the inference is irresistible that the, quota rule had broken down."
(emphasis supplied).
If sub-paras (C) to (E) of para 44 of the said decision are read together, it becomes quite clear that unless it is shown that quota rule had broken down and that it was impossible to make the direct recruitment for a number of years, the Board was not justified in not following its own Regulations pertaining to quota rule.
In this view of the matter we are unable to agree with the view taken by the learned single judge that the case of Direct Recruit Class-II Engineering Officers Association has application to the facts of the cases on hand.
Thus, in our considered opinion, the clear pronouncement of the Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court in the case of direct Recruit Class-I Engineering Officers Association helps the case of the appellants in the absence of the respondents establishing that it was impossible to adhere to the quota rule and that the quota rule had broken down.
10.
At the hearing, we asked the learned counsel appearing for the parties as to the factual position in regard to the ranking and positions occupied by the appellants and respondents 3 to 22, the learned counsel submitted that respondents 3 to 12 and 20 have retired from services; respondent No. 13 at present is working as Controller of Accounts and is to retire within about 18 months; respondents 14 and 16 are working as Deputy Controller of Accounts and are to retire shortly; respondents 15, 17 to 19 and 21 are working as Accounts Officers and respondent No. 22 has died.
Although on the question of law we have held in favour of the appellants, in the interest of justice and for no fault or respondents 3 to 22 we think it appropriate under the circumstances of the case not to disturb the position occupied by respondent Nos. 13, 14 and 16.
11.
In the result, for the reasons stated and discussion made, we pass the following order :-  (1) The Writ Appeals are allowed.
(2) The order under Appeals is set aside.
(3) A writ mandamus shall issue to respondent No. 1 Board to prepare a fresh Gradation of List in the cadre of Assistant Accounts Officer strictly following the quota rule and to accord appropriate ranking to all the Assistant Accounts Officers.
(4) As a result of assigning such ranking as aforesaid in the Gradation List of Assistant Accounts Officers respondent No. 1 Board shall consider the cases of the appellants for further promotions, if they are found eligible in accordance with the Regulations.
(5) However, we make it clear that this order does not affect the respondents 13, 14 and 16, in that they shall not be deemed or reverted from the position they are now occupying.
(6) Time for compliance four months from the date of receipt of the copy of this order.
(7) No order as to costs.
Writ Appeals allowed.