NK Sodhi, J - This order will dispose of four connected writ petitions No. 816 of 1990, 5127, 10780 and 19871 of 1992 as counsel for the parties are agreed that all of them involve identical questions of law and facts.
Arguments were advanced only in Civil Writ Petition 816 of 1990 and facts are, therefore, being taken from this petition.
2.
It is not disputed that the petitioner was senior to Gurdev Singh respondent No. 4 as a Head Constable in the year 1975.
He was also senior to one Mohinder Singh.
On April 1, 1975 said Mohinder Singh was given the benefit of his being a sportsman as a result whereof he became senior to the petitioner as well as to Gurdev Singh-respondent and many others.
Gurdev Singh respondent then filed a civil suit in the Court of Senior Sub-Judge, Ambala claiming seniority over the aforesaid Mohinder Singh as Head Constable.
The suit was dismissed by the trial Court and when the matter was taken in appeal before the Additional District Judge, Ambala the appeal was accepted, judgment and decree of the trial Court set aside and the suit filed by Gurdev Singh was decreed on January 25, 1979.
Respondent No. 4 was consequently declared senior to the said Mohinder Singh.
Thereafter, or a representation filed by respondent No. 4 seeking implementation of the decree passed by the Civil Court, the said respondent was given certain benefits by way of ante- dated promotions as result whereof he became senior not only to Mohinder Singh but also to the petitioner and many others some of whom are the petitioners in the connected writ petitions.
As a result of the implementation of the decree, the Deputy Inspector General, Haryana Armed Police, Madhuban, gave the following benefits to the plaintiff-respondent :  i) his name was approved for confirmation as Head Constable w.e.f.
13.4.1975 instead of 18878.  ii) his name was approved for admission to list 'D' w.e.f.
April 1, 1975 instead of March 18, 1980.  iii) his name was approved for promotion as officiating Sub Inspector w.e.f April 15, 1975 instead of September 8, 1981 the date of promotion as Assistant Sub Inspector.
iv) his name was approved for admission to list 'E' w.e.f.
1.5.1976 instead of October 25,1983.  v) his name was approved for confirmation in the rank of Sub Inspector w.e.f.
March 10, 1981.
3.
The present petition has been filed challenging the grant of the aforesaid benefits to Gurdev Singh-respondent and the petitioner claims seniority over respondent No. 4 on the ground that he was not a party to the suit filed by Gurdev Singh against Mohinder Singh.
It may be observed here that one Raghbir Singh Sub Inspector who was also senior to Gurdev Singh as Head Constable and was superseded by him as a result of the implementation of the Civil Court decree filed Civil Writ Petition 5517 of 1991 in this Court claiming seniority over Gurdev Singh respondent.
I allowed that writ petition on September 4, 1991 and directed the respondents therein to restore the seniority of Raghbir Singh over respondent No. 4.
The petitioner who is similarly situated places strong reliance on the decision of this Court in Raghbir Singh's case.
4.
Mr. Suresh Monga, learned Deputy Advocate General, Haryana appearing on behalf of the respondents submits that when Mohinder Singh was made senior to Gurdev Singh respondent and some others including the petitioner in the year 1975 Gurdev Singh respondent filed a civil suit and obtained a declaration that he was senior to the defendant therein.
It was in implementation of the decree of the Civil Court that he has not been given ante-dated promotions.
Petitioner who was admittedly senior to the said Mohinder Singh did not challenge his supersession then and now when Gurdev Singh has been made senior to Mohinder Singh in pursuance of the civil Court decree the petitioner has now chosen to file the present petition.
He filed representation (Annexure.P5 with the writ petition) which had been rejected in August, 1989.
5.
I have heard counsel for the parties at length.
The writ petition deserves to be dismissed on the ground of delay and also on the ground that the persons who are likely to be adversely affected in case the petitioner is granted relief have not been impleaded as parties in the present writ petition.
It is not disputed that the petitioner was superseded by Mohinder Singh in the year 1975 as a Head Constable.
Gurdev Singh respondent No. 4 who was also superseded was vigilant enough to challenge his superesession but the petitioner did not do so.
Respondent No. 4 succeeded in appeal before the Additional District Judge and obtained a declaration that he was senior to the said Mohinder Singh.
While implementing the civil Court decree Gurdev Singh respondent was given ante-dated promotions.
When Mohinder Singh superseded the petitioner in 1975 the latter should have challenged his superesession than as Gurdev Singh did but he kept quite.
The petitioner cannot now after a lapse of more than 15 years claim than since he was senior to Gurdev Singh his seniority should be restored.
Even if it be assumed that there are any equities in favour of the petitioner, it is equally well settled that delay defeats equity as well.
At this stage it would not be advisable to upset the entire seniority list and the petitioner who kept quiet when Mohinder Singh supersede him in 1975 must now fail.
Respondent No. 4 was given the benefit of the decree in August, 1986 and his representation for promotion was accepted and he was promoted in September, 1986 superseding the petitioner and many others.
Even then the petitioner filed his representation in 1988 after having waited for more than a year.
A Full Bench judgment of this Court in Jagjit Rai Vohra and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1974(2) SLR 27 squarely covers the matter in regard to delay.
This is what the learned Judges observed in para 8 of the judgment :  "This brings us to the question as to whether the petitioners are entitled to the benefit of the Supreme Court judgment irrespective of the fact that they have approached the Court after undue delay, and after the respondents had superseded them and worked in the higher posts for a considerable length of time.
One view could have been that the moment the Supreme Court gave its decision, effect should have been given to it without considering the benefit gained under the valid executive instructions by the respondents.
The other way of looking at the matter is that when the respondents superseded them and the petitioners took no action to challenge their supersession, and only woke up when the Supreme Court finally settled the matter in Shamsher Jang Shukla's case, would this Court be justified to exercise its discretion in their favour?
There is a lot of literature on this aspect of the matter.
The correct view seems to be that laches cannot be overlooked and each case will have to be examined to see whether a particular petitioner is or is not entitled to the relief available to him in view of the Supreme Court decision in Shamsher Jung Shukla's case (supra), it would be proper at this stage to refer to almost a score of settled decisions of the Supreme Court on this matter.."  Not only this, even if the claim of the petitioner was to be accepted at this belated stage and he was to be made senior to Gurdev Singh respondent, he would be superseding a large number of police officials who are about one hundred in number as averred in the written statement and those persons are not parties before me.
For this reason as well.
I find that the petitioner cannot succeed.
6.
It is true that the case of the petitioner is covered by my decision in Raghbir Singh's case (supra) but in that case no plea of laches had been taken up nor was the issue of any other persons not impleaded as parties in that case but likely to be affected by the judgment was raised with the result that there was no occasion for me to record a finding on these aspects of the case.
7.
As I am dismissing the writ petition on account of delay and failure on the part of the petitioner to implead necessary parties.
I need not deal with some other ancillary contentions advanced on behalf of the writ petitioner.
For the reasons recorded above, I find no merit in these petitions and they stand dismissed with no order as to costs.