SB Majmudar, CJ.
and Eswara Prasad, J - These two appeals arise out of the judgment of a learned single Judge in WP No. 13849/92 dated 27.11.92 issuing a Writ of Mandamus, directing the State Bank of Hyderabad-appellant in WA No. 1507/92 to accept the lowest tender submitted by the respondent, M/s. Jyothi Krishna Engineers, Hyderabad, by accepting the terms deposit receipt (for short 'TDR'), as made in substantial compliance of condition No. 12 of the terms and conditions of the tender.
Writ Appeal No. 1507/92 is filed by the State Bank of Hyderabad, and Writ Appeal No. 1553/92 is filed by M/s. Venkata Lakshmi Constructions, whose tender was second lowest, against the judgment of the learned single Judge.
2.
The State Bank of Hyderabad (for short, 'the Bank') invited tenders for the construction of a branch building at Latur in Maharastra State.
The last date of submission of tenders was 27.7.1992.
The respondent and the appellant in WA No. 1553/92 submitted tenders along with others.
The tenders were opened at 4 PM on 27.7.92.
According to the respondent-writ petitioner, he apprehended that his tender was not accepted as he submitted TDR for a sum of Rs. 63,260/- towards earnest money deposit instead of a bank draft, as required by the tender conditions.
He filed the writ petition praying for issuing a Writ of Mandamus declaring that the writ petitioner's bid is the lowest and that the work of construction of Branch office Building be awarded to him.
The Bank has taken the stand that the writ petitioner did not furnish earnest money deposit by way of a demand draft as per the tender conditions, and the tender was rejected.
The learned Judge, holding that the Bank could have waived the requirement of furnishing of earnest money receipt through bank draft, directed the bank to accept the tender of the writ petitioner and to award the contract in favour of the writ petitioner.
The learned Judge rejected the contention of the writ petitioner attributing mala fides to the Bank officials.
the appellant-Bank submitted that the tender of the respondent-writ petitioner was rightly rejected, as it was not accompanied by a demand draft as per the conditions of tender requiring the deposit of Rs. 63,260/- in the form of a bank draft drawn in favour of the Chief Manager (Services Branch) State Bank of Hyderabad.
He contended that the TDR accompanying the tender of the respondent, cannot be equated to a demand draft, as it is not transferable and is repayable only after 46 days after the date of issue.
The TDR reads as if the amount of Rs. 63,260/- was received from the Chief Manager of the Bank, whereas no such payment was made by the Chief Manager.
The TDR is in the account of the writ petitioner and is not payable to the Bank.
The learned Counsel further submitted that the earnest money bears no interest, whereas the TDR is repayable with interest at 12% pa after 46 days.
Under Clause 10 of the tender conditions, all tenders in which any of the prescribed conditions are not fulfilled, or are incomplete in any respect, are liable to be rejected and the tender of the respondent was rightly rejected for non-compliance of the essential condition of the tender.
3.
Sri E Manohar, appearing for the appellant in WA 1553/92, whose tender was the second lowest, submitted that no Mandamus can be issued to the Bank to waive tender conditions, that the learned Judge was in error in directing the Bank to accept the TDR and also to accept the tender of the respondent.
4.
Sri BV Subbaiah, learned Counsel appearing for the respondent-writ petitioner argued that there is no difference between a TDR and a demand draft, and that TDR was as good as a demand draft and the tender could not have been rejected.
He further contended that the Bank having kept quiet without returning the TDR from 27.7.92 till about three months, should be deemed to have waived the condition of the tender.
The contention that the earnest money deposit should be tendered in the form of a demand draft, is not an essential condition and is only an ancillary condition, and that the learned Judge was correct in directing the Bank to accept the TDR and to award the contract in favour of the respondent.
5.
The question that is falling for consideration is whether the Bank can be compelled to waive the condition with regard to furnishing of earnest money deposit in the form of demand draft and whether the Bank can be compelled to accept the tender of the respondent.
Clause 8 of Annexure V containing General Rules and Instructions for the guidance of the tenderers, requires earnest money amounting to Rs. 63,260/- in the form of Bank Draft drawn in favour of the Chief Manager (Premises), State Bank of Hyderabad, must accompany each tender.
Under Clause 10, acceptance of a tender will rest with Chief Manager (Premises) which does not bind itself to accept the lowest tender reserves to itself the authority to reject any or all of the tenders received without assignment of any reason.
All tenders in which any of the prescribed conditions are not fulfilled or are incomplete in any respect, are liable to be rejected.
Under Clause 10, the tender for works shall remain open for acceptance for a period of ninety days from the date of opening of tenders.
If any tenderer withdraws his tender before the said period, then the Bank shall be at liberty to forfeit the earnest money paid along with the tender.
Under Clause 12 of the General Conditions of contract in Annexure VIII, the Bank is not liable to pay any interest on the earnest money.
The earnest money of unsuccessful tenderers will be refunded without any interest soon after the decision to award the contract is taken, or after the expiry of the prescribed ninety days' period.
From the above mentioned terms of conditions, it is clear that the Bank has a right to forfeit the earnest money deposit in the event of a tenderer failing to perform his part of the contract or withdrawing his tender before the period of ninety days prescribed under Clause 20.
The earnest money deposit tendered is negotiable and bears no interest.
A demand draft is negotiable, whereas the TDR, which is not transferable, is not negotiable.
The TDR accompanying the tender is in the account of the writ petitioner and is not payable to the Bank.
It is also not repayable, within 46 days of its issue.
Therefore, it is not possible to hold that the TDR submitted along with the tender is in substantial compliance with the tender conditions.
6.
The learned Counsel for the respondent sought support from the decision in United Commercial Bank v. OGB Syndicate Limited, AIR 1968 SC 1115 contending that a depositor under a term deposit or a fixed deposit was the owner of the amount covered by the receipt and contended that inasmuch as the amount under TDR was recited to have been received from the Chief Manager (Premises) State Bank of Hyderabad, he remained as owner of the amount covered by the TDR and hence the amount stood in his name.
One cannot lose sight of the fact that the words "in A/C account of M/s. Jyothi Krishna Engineers' are added after the Chief Manager and the column 'payable' to is left blank."
In such circumstances, the said decision cannot help the respondent, as the amount covered by the fixed deposit in that case was payable to the Syndicate Limited.
Sri Subbaiah contended that the Bank should be deemed to have waived the condition of the tender accompanied by the TDR, as the TDR was not returned for nearly 3 months.
In the counter-affidavit of the Bank, it is stated that the tender of the respondent was rejected soon after it was opened as it was not accompanied by demand draft.
Though there is nothing to show that the respondent was present at the time of opening of tenders or that intimation was given informing the respondent that his tender was rejected before filing of the writ petition, waiver on the part of the Bank cannot be implied.
Waiver should be express and specific.
7.
Sri Subbaiah, relying on Poddar Steel Corpn v. Ganesh Engineering Works, AIR 1991 SC 1579, contended that a technical irregularity can be waived having regard to the fact that the tender of the respondent was the lowest.
It was a case in which the tender was accompanied by a cheque of the United Bank of India and not of the State Bank of India, as required by the tender notification.
The Supreme Court held therein that the requirement of a tender of a notification can be classified into two categories those which lay down the essential conditions of eligibility and the others which are merely ancillary or subsidiary with the main object to be achieved by the conditions.
In the first case the authority issuing the tender may be required to enforce them rigidly.
In the other cases it must be open to the authority to deviate from and not to insist upon the strict literal compliance of the condition in appropriate cases.
The Supreme Court did not find fault with the Diesel Locomotive Works in waiving the literal compliance with the tender condition, as the cheque of the United Bank of India drawn on its own Branch was sufficient for the purpose of achieving the main object of the condition.
In the present case, the Bank did not deem it fit to waive the condition of the tender in view of the fact that furnishing of TDR in the place of demand draft, could not be considered as sufficient compliance with tender conditions.
8.
Sri Subbaiah drew our attention to Administrator Municipal Corpn, Bilaspur v. Dattatreua Dahankar, AIR 1992 SC 1846 : 1992(1) R.C.R.
(Rent) 1 : 1992(1) R.R.R.
198 and submitted that a mechanical approach to construction is altogether out of step with modern positive approach and that the modern positive approach is to have purposeful construction that is to effectuate the object and purpose of the Act.
We fail to see how this decision will help the respondent.
The Supreme Court was concerned with the interpretation of Section 127A of the Madhya Pradesh Municipalities Act, 1961.
In Raj Gajadhar Nishad v. State of UP, 1990(2) SCC 486, the Supreme Court declined to interfere with the decision of the Commissioner in rejecting the tender for non-compliance of preconditions.
The contention therein was that the Commissioner could not have rejected the tender for a mere technical defect of not accompanying solvency certificate along with the tender.
The Court cannot compel by issuing a Writ of Mandamus to waive a condition of tender.
In G.J.
Fernandes v. State of Karnataka, 1990(2) SCC 488, the Supreme Court held that :  "The first is that the party issuing the tender has the right to punctiliously and rigidly enforce them.
Thus, if a party does not strictly comply with the requirements of Para III, V and VI of the NIT (notification inviting tenders), it is open to the KPC (accepting party) to decline to consider the party for the contract and if a party comes to court saying that the KPC should be stopped from doing so, the Court will decline relief."
Thus, the Court will not compel the accepting party to waive strict compliance with the tender conditions though it is open to the accepting party to waive such conditions, which, of course, should, not be arbitrary or discriminatory.
Refusal on the part of the Bank to waive the condition in the present case, cannot be held as arbitrary or discriminatory and the Bank cannot be compelled to waive the conditions with regard to furnishing of bank draft covering the earnest money deposit and to accept the tender of the respondent.
9.
It was next contended by Sri Subbaiah that the Circular issued by the Government of India Finance, (Banking Division) stating that "the general policy should be that the tenderers without remitting the earnest money will also be considered, but the contractor will be required to deposit the earnest money in the prescribed form before the acceptance letter is issued to him," should be followed by the Bank.
As rightly pointed out by Mr. Manohar, the said circular is not issued under any statutory authority and is not binding and not enforceable.
Under the provisions of the State Bank of India Subsidary Banking Act, 1965, the Central Government has no power to issue directions to the State Bank of Hyderabad.
Under Section 34 of the Act, it is open to the State Bank of India to issue directions to the State Bank of Hyderabad, and not the Central Government.
10.
For all the aforesaid reasons, the direction issued by the learned single judge cannot be sustained and the same is hereby set aside.
The writ appeals are allowed and the writ petition is dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Oral application for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court against the present order is rejected as, in our view, these are not fit cases in which such leave can be granted.
However, stay against, awarding of contract which was granted pending writ petition is directed to operate for a period of six weeks from to-day.
Appeal allowed.