Usha Mehra, J - The petitioner had filed a writ petition against the Union of India and Ors.
The said writ petition was allowed and the Rule was discharged.
While allowing writ petition this Court set aside the order of extension of tenure of the petitioner dated 24.12.90 as well as the public notice dated 27.12.90, putting the petitioner under suspension, with further direction that the petitioner will be entitled to all consequential benefits.
2.
The case of the petitioner is that the respondents have not paid the consequential benefits namely the outstanding salary, terminal benefits namely provident fund, gratuity and other dues, therefore, contempt proceedings be initiated against them.
3.
Mr. MM Sarin, appearing for the respondent, contended that no civil contempt is made out.
The court while allowing the writ petition had ordered for the consequential relief.
The remedy for the petitioner is by way of civil suit for the recovery of the same and not by way of contempt petition.
Mr. Sarin contended that the question as to what amount of gratuity, leave benefits, the petitioner is entitled to, has to be ascertained and commuted.
The question would arise whether this can be determined in this contempt proceeding.
This question affects the very maintainability of the Contempt of Court Petition because it is to be seen as to whether the Court can be called upon to settle the dispute between the parties by means of Contempt of Court Petition.
4.
The petitioner is claiming his consequential benefits because according to him he would be deemed to be in service till the date his tenure expired and not from the date he submitted the resignation.
He had resigned on 261290 which resignation according to the petitioner was never accepted.
Whereas according to respondent this resignation was accepted and the order of 8th December, 1992 was only a formality.
Moreover, according to Mr. Sarin, the direction for consequential benefits is only by way of declaration.
There was no prayer for consequential benefits in the writ petition, therefore, the order of the Division Bench cannot be construed to be a direction specifying as to what amount is due to the petitioner.
Without getting the order dated 8.12.92 quashed, he cannot claim that his resignation was not effective w.e.f.
261290.
In a contempt petition this Court cannot give interpretation to the Division Bench judgment nor can explain the same because that is not the scope of the proviso under Section 11 or under Section 2(b) of the Contempt of Court Act.
Under the contempt proceedings the Court can only direct the respondent to give that benefit which is directed by judicial pronouncement and not what is yet to be commuted.
Therefore, there is no flagrant disregard to the order of this Court.
He further contended that in order to hold the respondent for contempt, the petitioner has to prove that there was wilful disobedience on the part of the respondent.
In this case when there are disputed questions regarding the fact of the resignation, the wilful disobedience cannot be attributed to the respondent, and therefore, no contempt.
The remedy for the petitioner is to file a civil suit for recovery and not the contempt petition.
In this regard he had placed reliance on the decisions in the case of :-  Ashok Kumar Singh v. State of Bihar, reported in AIR 1992 SC 407 : 1992(2) SCT 613.
Jiwani Kumari Parekh v. Satyabrata Chakravorty, AIR 1991 Supreme Court 326 : 1990(2) R.C.R.
(Criminal) 693 : 1991(1) R.C.R.
(Rent) 24 : 1990(2) R.R.R.
590.
Shri V.G.
Nigam v. Kedar Nath Gupta, reported in JT 1992(5) SC 569 : 1993(1) SCT 173 (SC).
Kuldip Rastogi v. Vishva Nath Khanna, AIR 1979 Delhi 202.
Mrs Vrinda Anand v. Dr. (Maj.) Arun Anand, reported in AIR 1987 Delhi page 120.
Union of India v. Mario Cabrale Sa, AIR 1982 Supreme Court 691.
Babu Ram Gupta v. Sudhir Bhasin, AIR 1979 SC 1528.
PS Sawhney v. RK Aggarwal, reported in AIR 1988 Supreme Court 2135.
5.
Counsel for the petitioner on the other hand contended that upon the expiry of terms on 1191 the petitioner acquired vested right to get terminal benefits according to rules.
This right is reiterated and crystallised in the judicial decree and writ issued in terms of Division Bench order which ought to be complied with its entirety.
After cessation of employee-employer relationship the purported acceptance of resignation dated 8.12.92 is absolutely without jurisdiction and authority of law, non est and nullity.
The non-payment of consequential benefits as per the judicial pronouncement tantamouts to wilful and deliberate non-compliance of the Court order.
He further contended that the implementation of the judgment of this Court cannot be obstracted/avoided by inaction and/or misconceived action.
The respondents have found it a subterfuge and device for adopting such tactics by means of which the petition should be deprived of the benefits of the judicial pronouncement and hence contempt is made out.
6.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
Admittedly the question as to what terminal benefits the petitioner is entitled to have not been spelt out in the Division Bench judgment.
That is a matter to be gone into and this Court in contempt proceedings cannot determine the same.
The law is well settled that the disputed question of facts cannot be gone into, it is only the authoritative decision in the judicial pronouncement, if wilfully disobeyed, that the contempt can be initiated under Section 10 or 2(b) of the Contempt of Court Act.
But no such case is made out in the present petition.
The remedy for the petitioner, to my mind, is by way of civil suit for recovery of the amounts and not by the present contempt petition.
The petition is accordingly dismissed.