Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner has inter-alia prayed for the quashing of the order dated February 20, 1981 passed by the State Bank of India (hereinafter referred to as the Bank) by which he was dismissed from service and also for the issue of an appropriate direction to the respondents to treat him as "under suspension" till the final outcome of the appeal before the Hon'ble Supreme Court vide order dated 931987 (P-7) and to grant the petitioner the subsistence allowance till 931987."
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
According to the petitioner, on May 1, 1980 his wife "while preparing breakfast caught fire from the stove."
A case under Section 302/34 Indian Penal Code was registered against the petitioner, his mother and his niece (sister's daughter).
All the three were arrested by the police.
They were granted bail by the learned Additional Sessions Judge on May 23, 1980.
On account of his involvement in this case the petitioner was placed under suspension by the Bank vide orders dated June 18, 1980.
Vide order dated December 9, 1980 the petitioner was convicted by the learned Sessions Judge.
His appeal was dismissed by this Court on June 4, 1981.
After a lapse of about five years, the petitioner filed a special leave petition in Hon'ble the Supreme Court if India viz. SLP (Criminal) No. 333 of 1986.
Vide order dated March 9, 1987 their Lordships were pleased to dismiss this petition.
His conviction was thus sustained by even the apex Court.
The petitioner was finally released from jail on March 16, 1992.
3.
In the meantime, after the petitioner had been convicted by the learned trial Court, the Bank issued a show cause notice dated January 1, 1981, calling upon the petitioner to explain as to why he be not dismissed from service.
The petitioner submitted his reply on February 4, 1981.
Vide order dated February 20, 1981, a copy of which has been produced on the record as Annexure P-6 with the writ petition, the bank dismissed the petitioner from service.
The petitioner challenges this order through this writ petition which was filed by him on September 23, 1993.
He avers that he was entitled to the payment of subsistence allowance till the dismissal of his petition for special leave by their Lordships of the Supreme Court on March 9, 1987 and that the order dated February 20, 1981 dismissing him from service was wholly illegal and void.
4.
We have heard Mr. KL Arora, learned counsel for the petitioner.
He has submitted that the petitioner had a right to the payment of subsistence allowance till the criminal case had been disposed of finally.
He further submits that the petitioner's dismissal is vitiated as the subsistence allowance had not been paid to him.
He has placed reliance on a decision of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in State of Maharashtra v. Chandrabhan, AIR 1983 SC 803.
It has also been contended that the order of dismissal has not been passed by the competent authority and that it is not in accordance with the law.
5.
A persual of the sequence of events as delineated above shows that the petitioner had been dismissed from service on February 20, 1981.
The petitioner has admittedly filed this petition after the lapse of more than 12 years on September 23, 1993.
The entire claim made in the petition is highly belated.
Even a suit would be barred by limitation.
At the lowest, a triable issue of limitation arises.
In such a situation, we find no ground to interfere with the order at this belated stage.
The entire claim as made in this petition suffers from the vice of laches and deserves to be rejected on this short ground alone.
6.
Irrespective of the above, it deserves notice that the petitioner's conviction was ordered by the learned trial Court on December 9, 1980.
His appeal was dismissed by this Court on June 4, 1981.
He filed an SLP after a lapse of about 5 years in the year 1986.
Even this petition was dismissed on March 9, 1987.
In such a situation, we are unable to find any merit in the petitioner's claim that he was entitled to the payment of subsistence allowance till the date of dismissal of his SLP If such a claim were to be upheld, the State exchequer would be burdened with the payment of substantial amounts of money to employees who may take their own sweet time to file an appeal or a petition before their Lordships of the Supreme Court.
Such an intention is neither inferable from any rule nor can the claim be sustained in equity.
7.
As for the decision of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Chandrabhan's case (supra), it may be mentioned that the position in this case was entirely different.
Therein, Rule 151 inter alia provided for the payment of subsistence allowance at the rate of Re.
1/- per month.
Such a rule was held to be violative of Articles 14, 16, 21 and 311(2) of the Constitution of India.
Such is not the position in the present case.
Consequently, the decision is of no assistance to the petitioner.
8.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has also contended that the order of dismissal has not been passed by the competent authority and that it was not in conformity with the provisions of the rules.
We find no prima facie ground to sustain this plea.
A perusal of the order dated February 20, 1981 shows that it has been passed by the Disciplinary Authority.
The petitioner had been appointed by an order issued by the Branch Manager.
It had not been shown that the impugned order had not been passed by the authority prescribed under the rules governing the petitioner's conditions of service.
9.
There is, thus, no merit in this petition.
It is, accordingly, dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.