VK Bali, J - SK Malhotra, General Manager, Milkfed, Punjab, seeks a writ in the nature of cetiorari so as to quash the process of filling up the post of Additional Managing Director, Milkfed, Punjab, set into motion by advertisement in the Tribune dated May, 1989 and consequent interview fixed for August 9, 1989.
2.
Briefly, his case is that at present he is working on the post of General Manager (Headquarters) in the Punjab State Co-operative Milk Producers' Federation Limited, Chandigarh (hereinafter referred to as the Milkfed) and his conditions of service are governed by the Punjab State Co-operative Milk Producer's Federation Limited (Common Cadre) Rules (here-in-after referred to as the Rules).
Before joining the respondent-Milkfed as General Manager, he was working as Secretary with the Punjab Diary Development Corporation Ltd, Chandigarh (here-in-after called the PDDC).
The post of Secretary, as per the case of petitioner, was a higher post than the post of General Manager as all the General Managers in the PDDC were answerable to the Secretary and it was he, who used to write their annual Confidential Reports.
On the post of Secretary, he enjoyed higher status, responsibility and higher financial powers.
His status in the PDDC was only next to the Managing Director and all papers/correspondence was routed through him.
He also enjoyed higher administrative powers there.
The PDDC was, however, taken over by the Milked w.e.f.
April 9, 1983 with all its assets and employees on notional deputation.
Petitioner's services were also taken over by the Milkfed at the time of his absorption the Milkfed but only as a General Manager, which, as per the case of petitioner, was lower than the post of Secretary, held by him in the PDDC.
Before, however, his absorption in the Milkfed, he had represented to both the PDDC and the Milkfed that the post of General Manager given to him in Milkfed was lower in status than the post of Secretary held by him in PDDC and, therefore, he should be given an equivalent post in the Milkfed.
The said representation given by him, according to petitioner, is still pending.
Petitioner was reverted from the post of Secretary to that of General Manager.
He carried a representation against the order aforesaid which was accepted vide order dated July 13, 1984.
The said order has been annexed as Annexure P-3 through civil misc. No. 16195 of 1989 vide which he had prayed to produce additional documents.
While dealing with his representation, the Managing Director held that after total examination of his case, the board was pleased to resolve, "Since there existed a post of Secretary apart from the post of Company Secretary in the Corporation, therefore, the reversion of Shri SK Malhotra, from the post of Secretary to the post of General Manager was wrong.
Shri SK Malhotra, accordingly, is considered to have continued to hold the post of Secretary in the Corporation till 8.4.1983 and he shall be paid special pay of Rs. 200/- per month for the period he worked as Secretary of the Corporation."
The basic case of petitioner is that the order of reversion could be set aside as a whole and it could not be said vide Annexure P-9 that he shall be considered to have continued to hold the post of Secretary in Corporation till April 8, 1983.
If this order is bad, it is further contended that he has to be adjusted in the Milkfed to a post which may be equivalent not that of Secretary and inasmuch as he has been accommodated on the post of General Manager, it has adversely affected his service career.
His further prayer in the wake of setting aside the order (Annexure p-9) to the extent aforesaid, is that he may be promoted to the post of Additional Managing Director in preference to those, who have been appointed in pursuance to advertisement dated May 31, 1989.
3.
The writ has been opposed and separate written statements have been filed by respondent Nos. 1, 3 and 4.
The main contestant is Milkfed.
Besides contesting the claim of petitioner on merits, Milkfed has raised a preliminary objection with regard to the maintainability of the writ against a Co- operative Society.
The objection to be precised is that Milkfed is neither State nor instrumentality of the State with the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
Without much commenting upon the order of reversion and setting aside of the same, the defence is that in any case the petitioner was not entitled to the post higher than that of General Manager.
Learned counsel for petitioner at this stage has made a statement in the Court that petitioner gives up all his claims for the time being and confines his case to the limited extent of challenging part of order setting aside his reversion vide which even though his reversion was set aside but the same was limited to a particular date i.e. April 8, 1983.
This statement has been made by learned counsel in view of a preliminary objection raised by respondent - Milkfed that the writ qua other reliefs is not maintainable as qua the said reliefs, directions are sought to be issued against it (Milkfed) and it is neither a State nor instrumentality of State within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
Learned counsel appearing for the petitioner is conscious of the fact that this matter, in another civil writ petition No. 4418 of 1992, is pending decision by a Division Bench of this Court and if the relief against the Milkfed is also insisted upon, then it would further delay the main relief to the petitioner, on the basis of which alone the other reliefs depend.
He has, however, reserved his right to file a fresh petition on the same cause of action in case the Division Bench decides that Milkfed is a State or instrumentality of State within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
In view of the peculiar facts as have been noticed above, this Court is convinced that further delay in the matter would cause irreparable loss to petitioner and, therefore, permission is granted to him to file a fresh petition on the same cause of action, that is for the reliefs which have not been pressed at this stage.
4.
Coming now to the merits of controversy, it will be noticed that petitioner was admittedly holding the post of Secretary in PDDC prior to its notional takeover by the Milkfed.
He was reverted and even had filed a representation against the order of his reversion prior to his absorption in the Milkfed.
While dealing with the representation, the competent authority came to record a firm finding of fact that reversion of petitioner from the post of Secretary to that of General Manager, was wrong.
Once the order of reversion of petitioner was hold to be wrong, it could not be said that he would continue to hold the post of Secretary only upto April 8, 1983.
It requires to be mentioned here that PDDC was taken over by the Milkfed on April 9, 1983 and it is for this reason that the date upto which petitioner was to hold the post of Secretary in PDDC, was mentioned as April 8, 1983.
It appears that the competent authority was of the view which was, of course, erroneous that he had no jurisdiction to deal with the case of petitioner from the date when PDDC was to be taken over by the Milkfed.
Petitioner being an employee of PDDC, authorities competent to deal with the case of petitioner in PDDC, had every jurisdiction to deal with its employees prior to when it was taken over by the Milkfed.
That apart, once reversion order was held to be illegal, it could not be setaside either for a limited purpose or for a limited period.
In fact, even the respondents have not been able to justify the cut off date upto which alone the petitioner was to hold the post of Secretary.
Their only plea is that even if petitioner was to hold the post of Secretary in PDDC at the time when it was taken over by Milkfed, he could not be promoted to the post of Additional Managing Director but, as mentioned above, this aspect of the case cannot be gone into at this stage and as and when petitioner might file a fresh writ to obtain the reliefs aforesaid, this question would be decided.
5.
The only ground on which the limited relief of petitioner is opposed by respondents, is that petitioner approached this Court at a belated stage and on that ground only this petition should be dismissed.
I am unable to accept this contention.
The undisputed facts of this case reveal that petitioner filed representation praying him to treat as a Secretary and to undo the words limiting his tenure as Secretary upto a particular date as also to adjust him to a post equivalent to that of Secretary on March 21, 1985.
Ever since then he had been making one representation or the other.
Annexure P-11 is a representation addressed to the Managing Director, Milkfed and the same was filed on December 8, 1986.
Annexure P-12 is a letter written by him in continuation of his earlier representation and the same was once again addressed to the Managing Director to September 26, 1987.
Likewise vide Annexures P-13 and P-14, dated January 7, 1988 and January 15, 1988, respectively, he once again made representations and clamoured for justice.
In 1989, admittedly the petition in this Court was filed.
It is settled by now that dismissing a petition which is belated or pertains to a stale claim, is not a rule of law but is only a rule of practice.
In very case, thus, the Court has to find the reasons for approaching the Court at a belated stage.
If there are justifiable grounds for coming to the Court at a belated stage, the Court can always condone the delay and grant the desired relief.
The Apex Court in M/s Dehri Rohtas Light Railway Co. Ltd. v. District Board Bhojpur and Ors, AIR 1993 Supreme Court 802 held, "The rule which says that the Court may not enquire into belated and stale claim is not a rule of law but a rule of practice based on sound and proper exercise of discretion.
Each case must depend upon its own facts.
It will all depend on what the breach of the fundamental right and the remedy claimed are and how the delay arose.
The principle on which the relief to the party on the grounds of laches or delay is denied is that the rights which have accrued to others by reason of the delay in filing the petition should not be allowed to be disturbed unless there is reasonable explanation for the delay.
The real test to determine the delay in such cases is that the petitioner should come to the writ Court before a parallel right is created and that the lapse of time is not to physical running of time.
Where the circumstances justifying the conduct exist, the illegality which is manifest cannot be sustained on the sole ground of laches."
This Court in Gurnam Singh Brar v. The State of Punjab and Anr., 1988(1) SLR 462, while dealing with similar facts, that is, where repeated representations were made, held that when factum of filing a representation was admitted and the petitioner had approached the Court before any of the representation was rejected, there was no question of delay.
It may be mentioned here that none of the representations filed by petitioner were ever decided.
It is true that Mr. Patwalia, learned counsel appearing for Milkfed has brought to my notice an order that was passed in 1986 vide which one of the representations of petitioner was rejected but as candidly admitted by him, the order rejecting his representation was never communicated to petitioner.
The Supreme Court in yet another case Sushil Kumar Yadunath Jha v. Union of India and Anr., 1986(3) SLR 32, condoned the delay after recording a finding that the appellant of said case had made repeated representations and the same were even supported by relevant officers and thus it will be difficult to hold that appellant was guilty of laches in resorting to the process of relief.
Part of the order, which has been impugned, is patently illegal and even during the course of arguments learned counsel for respondents could not support it on any cogent ground, whatsoever.
The repeated representations of petitioner fell on deaf ears.
Petitioner filed repeated representations and it is rather unfortunate that in none of the representations attention of the respondents ever came to be focussed for to one, reference of which has been given above but the decision taken on the said representation was admittedly not conveyed to petitioner.
6.
In view of the discussion made above, this petition is allowed.
The order of reversion to the extent it has been challenged, that is entitling the petitioner to retain the post of Secretary only upto April 8, 1983, is set aside.
Consequently, petitioner shall be treated always to have been on the post of Secretary.
It is on this basis, if he is entitled to any other relief, he shall be able to ask for the same in a separate petition that may be filed by him.
This petition is allowed with costs quantified at Rs. 1000/-.