RK Nehru, J - This Regular Second Appeal has been directed against the judgment and decree dated October 13, 1992 of the first Appellate Court, reversing in appeal, those of the trial Court.
Facts :-  2.
Appellant Kartar Singh was working as a driver in the Punjab Roadways in the employment of the respondent State.
His services were terminated by the respondent vide order dated November 21, 1975.
He challenged his termination in the civil Court.
Vide judgment and decree dated December 13, 1989, the trial Judge set aside the order of his termination by holding it to be illegal and ordered his reinstatment, but deprived him of the back wages for the period be remained out of job on account of the impugned order of termination.
Against the judgment and decree of the trial Court, two separate appeals were filed in the first Appellate Court, one by the appellant claiming to be entitled to back wages for the aforesaid period and the second by the State- respondent challenging the judgment of the trial Court reinstating the appellant in service.
3.
The lower appellate Court dismissed the appeal of the State respondent vide judgment and decree dated January 25, 1991.
Against this judgment and decree, Regular Second Appeal was filed by the State and that was dismissed in limine on July 30, 1991, and even the Special Leave Petition, No. 16962 of 1991 filed by the State of Punjab was dismissed by the Apex Court on November 25, 1991.
4.
Now in this appeal, the main submission of the learned counsel for the appellant is that once the respondent-State challenging the order of re- instatement of the appellant has lost upto the Apex Court, it was not within the jurisdiction of the lower appellate Court to set aside the order of re- instatement which had attained finality, on the point of limitation.
It was further contended that only point raised in the appeal before the lower appellate Court was that the appellant was entitled for back wages as the order of termination was held to be illegal and void by the trial Court.
5.
I find substance in both these submissions of the learned counsel for the appellant.
Since the order of re-instatement passed by the trial Court was confirmed upto the Apex Court, then it was not open to the lower appellate Court to set aside that order which has otherwise attained finality.
The lower appellate Court committed an illegality while dismissing the suit on the point of limitation, when the reinstatement of the appellant was not challenged before the lower appellate Court.
Thus, the judgment of the trial Court ordering re-instatement of the appellant has to be maintained.
6.
There is also force in the contention of the learned counsel for the appellant that once order of termination of the appellant was held to be illegal, then as a consequence thereof, he was entitled to all back wages and service benefits.
No plausible reason has been given by the trial Court while denying the benefit of back wages and other service benefits to the appellant.
Once the order of termination of the appellant was held to be illegal and as a consequence thereto, he was reinstated in service, then in all fairness and natural justice, he must be entitled to all benefits accruing to him with regard to back wages for the period he remained out of job on account of the order of termination.
In holding so, I am fortified by a judgment of this Court, reported as Krishan Lal Comrade v. Panipat Municipality, 1993(2) SLR 157 : 1993(2) SCT 500, wherein reliance was placed on a judgment of the Apex Court in Radha Ram v. Municipal Committee, Barnala and others, 1983(1) SLR 151.
In Krishan Lal Comrade (supra), the delinquent employee was retired at the age of 58 years.
He filed a suit challenging the order of retirement at that age of 58 years.
The Civil Court decreed the suit of the delinquent employee by holding that his order of retirement was illegal and void and he was held entitled to retire at the age of 60 years.
In this situation, it was observed as under :-  "Once it is held that the retirement of the plaintiff is illegal and void, it necessarily follows that such an employee continues to be in service and so is entitled to emoluments following from his status."
The principle laid down in the above judgment is fully applicable to the facts of the case in hand.
Consequently, I accept the appeal.
The judgment and decree of the lower appellate Court are set aside and the suit of the plaintiff-appellant is decreed, and as a result thereof, the appellant is entitled to be re-instated in service with back wages and all other service benefits from the date of his termination till the date of re-instatement.
Keeping in view the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case, there is no order as to costs.