VK Bali, J - The Tribune Trust through its Editor-in-Chief by means of present petition filed under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India seeks issuance of writ of certiorari so as to quash Annexures P-7 to P-10.
It is through orders Annexure P-19 and P-10 that petitioner has been summoned to answer the claim of respondent No. 2, Babu Ram Bansal that he made before the Labour Court, Bhatinda Under Section 33-C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
The aforesaid summons were issued in pursuance of his applications filed under section 33-C(2) Annexure P-7 and P-8).
2.
Brief facts on which relief aforesaid rests, reveal that petitioner is a registered trust and undertakes the publishing of three leading daily newspapers namely "The Tribune, The Dainik Tribune and The Punjabi Tribune'.
The Central office of the trust is located at Chandigarh.
The petitioner trust for collection and dissemination of news takes the services of three categories of persons.
The first category consists of Correspondents, Senior Correspondents, Principal Correspondents and Special Correspondents.
This first category of persons mentioned above are regular and whole time employees of the establishment.
The second category consists of persons whose principal avocation is not journalism but they send news on ad hoc basis and are paid according to the space utilised as per the rates applicable.
They are also paid a minimum retention allowance.
The third category consists of part-time Correspondents whose principal avocation is that of journalism.
These people work for multiplicity of newspaper establishments.
As per the case of petitioner they are all 'Working Journalists' as defined in Section 2(f) of the Working Journalists and other Newspaper Employees (Condition of Service) and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1955 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Act of 1955').
Before the matter is proceeded any further, it shall be useful to see the definition of 'Working Journalists' as defined in Section 2(f) of the Act of 1955 and the same reads thus :-  "Working Journalist means a person whose principal avocation is that of a journalist and (who is employed as such, either whole-time or part-time, in or in relation to, one or more newspaper establishments), and includes an editor, a leader, writer, news-editor, sub-editor, feature-writer, copy- tester, reporter, correspondent, cartoonist, news-photographer and proof- reader, but does not include any such person who -  i) is employed mainly in a managerial or administrative capacity; or  ii) being employed in a supervisory capacity, performs, either by the nature of the duties attached to his office or by reason of the powers vested in him, functions mainly of a managerial nature'"  The case of the petitioner further is that respondent No. 2 was a 'Working Journalist' as defined in Section 2(f) (supra).
3.
Respondent No. 2 is stated to have filed a criminal complaint on 1411986 against the petitioner trust in the Court of Judicial Magistrate I Class, Mansa under Sections 13, 15 and 18(1) of the Act of 1955.
In particular, the allegations in the complaint aforesaid were that the petitioner was violating the Palekar Wage Board Award and Bachawat Wage Board Award inasmuch as he was not being paid his wages in accordance with the aforesaid awards.
It was further alleged that he was not being paid Provident Fund as also Bonus.
The petitioner in consequence of the summons issued to it, controverted the allegations as detailed above and after hearing the matter, the Magistrate dealing with the complaint, dismissed the same on 12.9.1989.
A finding was recorded in the order aforesaid that respondent No. 2 was not an employee of the petitioner.
However, without waiting for the result of the complaint aforesaid, respondent No. 2 moved two applications under Section 17 of the Act of 1955 before the Labour Commissioner, Punjab against the Dainik Tribune and the Punjabi Tribune respectively on 391988.
Obviously, the relief claimed in the aforesaid two applications was the same regarding which complaint was made to the Magistrate as mentioned above.
The petitioner, in the aforesaid circumstances, had to contest these applications as well wherein the preliminary objection was also raised that the Labour Commissioner, Punjab had no jurisdiction in the matter in view of Rule 36 of Working Journalist (Conditions of Service & Miscellaneous Provisions) Rules, 1957 (hereinafter referred to as the Rules of 1957).
Labour Commissioner who was dealing with the matter accepted the preliminary contention of petitioner and, therefore, rejected the applications of respondent No. 2 vide order dated 1531989.
It was held by the Labour Commissioner that the grievance of respondent No. 2 fell within the jurisdiction of Chandigarh Administration and since the Central office of the petitioner was located at Chandigarh, he could not proceed with the matter.
It is thereafter that the respondent No. 2 for the same relief, as has been indicated above, moved two applications against Punjabi Tribune and Dainik Tribune under Section 330C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act in the Labour Court at Bhatinda.
Copies of these applications are Annexures P-7 and P-8.
The Labour Court dealing with the matter issued notices to the petitioner which have been annexed with the present petition as annexures P-9 and P-10.
It is these two applications under Section 33-C(2) and in consequence whereof notices that were issued to petitioner which are sought to be quashed in the present petition as indicated in the earlier part of this judgment.
4.
Mr. Mittal, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the petitioner contends that even though the matter is at initial stage and only summons have been issued yet the petitioner shall be entitled to ask for quashing of the summoning orders (P-9 & P-10) if the petitioner was successful in showing that the Labour Court at Bhatinda lacked inherent jurisdiction in dealing with the matter.
For his aforesaid contention, learned counsel relies on Chief of the Army Staff and others v. Major Dharam Pal Kukrety 1985(2) LLJ 165, wherein it has been held that when a prejudicial action is without jurisdiction, it is not necessary to wait for the injury to be caused before seeking the protection of Court and in such cases of total want of jurisdiction writ is maintainable against Show Cause Notice.
With a view to show that the Labour Court, Bhatinda lacks inherent jurisdiction so as to deal with the matter i.e. the claim of the contesting respondent as has been made out in his applications filed under Section 33-C(2), it has been argued that Section 17 of the Act of 1955 provides mode of recovery of money due from the employer and if any question arises as to the amount due under this Act to a newspaper employee from his employer, the State Government may, on its own motion or upon application made to it, refer the question to any Labour Court constituted by it under Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
It is pleaded and so argued by learned counsel that the claim of respondent No. 2 is to get wages due to him as fixed by Palekar Wage Board Award and the Bachawat Wage Board Award and the wages on the aforesaid counts are squarely covered under the provisions of Section 13 of the Act of 1955.
At this stage it shall be relevant to reproduce Sections 13 as well as 17 of the Act of 1955 :-  "13.
Working journalists entitled to wages at rates not less than those specified in the order - On the coming into operation of an order of the Central Government under Section 12, every working journalist shall be entitled to be paid by his employer wages at the rate which shall in no case, be less than the rate of wages specified in the order."
"17.
Recovery of money due from an employer :-  (1) Where any amount is due under this Act to a newspaper employee from an employer, the newspaper employee himself, or any person authorised by him in writing in this behalf or in case of the death of the employee, any member of his family may, without prejudice to any other mode of recovery, make an application to the State Government for the recovery of the amount due to him and if the State Government or such authority as the State Government may specify in this behalf, is satisfied that any amount is so due, it shall issue a certificate for that amount to the Collector, and the Collector shall proceed to recover that amount in the same manner as an arrears of land revenue.
(2) If any question arises as to the amount due under this Act to a newspaper employee from his employer, this State Goverment may, on its own motion or upon application made to it, refer the question to any Labour Court constituted by it under Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), or under any corresponding law relating to investigation and settlement of industrial disputes in force in the State and the said Act or law shall have effect in relation to the Labour Court as if question so referred were a matter referred to the Labour Court for adjudication under that Act or law.
(3) The decision of the Labour Court shall be forwarded by it to the State Government which made the reference and any amount found due by the Labour Court may be recovered in the manner provided in sub-section (1)."
Reliance has further been placed upon Rule 36 of the Rules of 1957 so as to argue that application under Section 17 of the Act, which is to be made in form 'C' has to be made to the Government of the State, where the Central Office or the Branch Office of the newspaper establishment in which the newspaper employee is employed, situated.
Rule 36 reads thus :-  "36.
Application under Section 17 of the Act - An application under Section 17 of the Act shall be made in Form 'C' to the Government of the State, where the Central Office or the Branch Office of the newspaper establishment in which the newspaper employee is employed, situated."
From the provisions that have been quoted above, it is argued that inasmuch as respondent No. 2 is a Working Journalist and is covered under the provisions of the Act of 1955, he had no choice but for to ask for the relief by making an application to the Government and inasmuch as the Head Office of the petitioner Trust is located at Chandigarh, such application had necessarily to be made to the Administration of Union Territory, Chandigarh.
It is further argued that in view of the specific provisions dealing with the matter, resort could not be had to the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act and even if it is presumed that the Industrial Disputes Act covers the claim of respondent No. 2, he had to seek a reference from the Government as the relief asked for by him was not based on his established rights.
5.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and going through the records of the case, I am, however, of the opinion that the points raised by Mr. Mittal have no merit.
Even a bare perusal of Section 17 of the Act of 1955 would reveal that where any amount is due under the Act to a newspaper employee from an employer, and the said amount is an admitted amount, the remedy of course, is to make an application to the State Government for recovery of the said amount but that is without prejudice to any other mode of recovery.
The words "without prejudice to any other mode of recovery" undoubtedly convey the meaning that the other modes of recovery, like civil suit, or resort to the provisions of Industrial Disputes Act or any other remedy that may be available, are not barred.
In fact, it appears that Section 17 was framed within view to provide a speedy remedy and it is for that reason that on its satisfaction that any amount is due, the State Government can issue a certificate for that amount to the Collector, who shall proceed to recover that amount in the same manner as an arrears of land revenue.
That being the position, respondent No. 2 was well within his rights to approach the Labour Court.
Insofar as the question of seeking a reference from the Government is concerned, suffice it to say that even though the title of application mentions Section 33-C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, the prayer is in terms of Section 13 of the Act of 1955.
A Working Journalist is entitled to the wages at rates not less than specified in the order on coming into operation of the order of the Central Government as is clearly made out from the provisions of Section 13 of the Act aforesaid.
The application is based upon the wages that a working Journalist is entitled to under Palekar Wage Board Award and Bachawat Wage Board Award.
The reading of the application as such does not show that respondent No. 2 is asking for settlement or determination of his rights.
May be permissible for the petitioner to show to the contrary but the jurisdiction of the Labour Court to issue summons at least is not based upon the defence that might be projected.
On the other hand, any court dealing with the matter of any kind, would have jurisdiction if on the pleadings made out in the petitioner, it is competent to grant the relief.
It shall, thus, be open to petitioner to contest the matter before the Labour Court and obviously, if the very right of respondent No. 2 to claim the wages is disputed, the Labour Court will go into the matter but at this stage it can not be said that the claim of respondent No. 2 was such which could not be gone into the Labour Court without seeking a reference.
6.
The last contention of Mr. Mittal that the only respondent which was necessary or proper party and thus to be arrayed in application under Section 33-C(2) was the Trust and not the Tribune Trust is again such a question which cannot and should not be decided in proceedings as determination of question aforesaid also depends upon the various facts.
This question again is in the domain of Labour Court.
Be that as it may, the aforesaid questions would be decided by the Labour Court but that would be only if the defence is put in by the petitioner before the Labour Court and all the points referred to above are pressed into service.
It is, however, made clear that in case objections to the effect aforesaid are raised before the Labour Court, the same would be decided by it.
For the reasons mentioned above, this petition is dismissed.
However, these shall be no order as to costs.