SK Jain, J - Baldev Singh was employed as Technical Assistant Grade I in the Food Corporation of India.
He was suspended on 361982.
From Patran he was transferred to Gurdaspur and was directed to report there.
He did not join at Gurdaspur for a long time and ultimately reported for duty only on 11.5.1983.
He was charge-sheeted for his remaining absent from his head- quarter for that period.
A regular enquiry was held.
Enquiry report was submitted.
Vide order dated 1091985, Ex. P-1 Senior Regional Manager, Food Corporation of India, reduced him in rank from the post of Technical Assistant Grade-I to Technical Assistant Grade-II with effect from the date of issuance of the order and the period of his absence from the headquarter during the suspension was ordered to be treated as leave withput pay.
He challenged the said order and the enquiry proceedings by filing civil suit No. 54-T of 1989 instituted on 25101986 on various grounds.
The suit was contested on behalf of the respondents.
It was, however, dismissed by the Sub Judge Ist Class, Samana vide his judgment and decree dated 28.8.1989.
Feeling aggrieved, the plaintiffs preferred civil appeal No. 296-T of 24.10.1989/91 which was allowed by the learned Additional District Judge, Patiala, vide his judgment and decree dated 591982.
The Food Corporation of India and others, respondents have challenged the above said judgment and decree of the learned First Appellate Court in this Regular Second Appeal.
2.
Sole argument advanced by the learned counsel for the appellant is that the First Appellate Court had allowed the appeal on the ground that copy of the enquiry report was not supplied to the plaintiff before passing the impugned order and that, therefore, he was not afforded an opportunity to make representation against the report of the Inquiry Officer.
It was further submitted that the First Appellate Court has wrongly applied the ratio laid down in Civil Writ Petition No. 3491 of 1986 (Lal Chand v. State of Haryana and others).Union of India and others v. Mohd.
Ramzan Khan, 1991(1) SLR 159 : 1991(1) SCT 111 (SC) : (AIR 1991 SC 471) in the instant case because the order of punishment having been passed prior to the delivery of the judgment in Mohd.
Ramzan's case (supra), the ratio laid down in the said Supreme Court case would not be applicable herein.
3.
In reply, learned counsel for the respondents has argned that since a copy of the enquiry report was not supplied to the petitioner, the order of termination is vitiated.
He has also placed reliance on the decision of the Supreme Court in Mohd Ramzan's case.
4.
I have given an anxious consideration to the rival arguments and have also gone through Mohd.
Ramzan's case.
The short point which was under consideration of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Mohd.
Ramzan's case was as to whether the alteration of the provisions of Article 311(2) under the 42 Amendment of the Constitution doing away with the opportunity of showing cause against the proposed punishment, the delinquent has lost his right to be entitled to a copy of the report of enquiry in the disciplinary proceedings.
Their Lordships had answered the said question in following terms vide para No. 15 of the said judgment :-  "Deletion of the second opportunity from the scheme of Article 311(2) of the Constitution has nothing to do with providing of a copy of the report to the delinquent in the matter of making representation.
Even though the second stage of the inquiry in Article 311(2) has been abolished by amendment, the delinquent is still entitled to represent against the conclusion of the Inquiry Officer holding that the charges or some of the charges are established and holding the delinquent guilty of such charges.
For doing away with the effect of the inquiry report or to meet the recommendations of the Inquiry Officer in the matter of imposition of punishment, furnishing a copy of the report becomes necessary and to have the proceedings completed by using some material behind the back of the delinquent is a position not countenanced by fair procedure.
While by law application of natural justice could be totally ruled out or truncated, nothing has been done by the 42 Amendment which could be taken as keeping natural justice out of the proceedings and the applicability of the rules of natural justice to such an inquiry is not affected by the 42nd amendment.
Therefore, supply of copy of the inquiry report alongwith recommendations, if any, in the matter of proposed punishment to be inflicted and the delinquent would, therefore, be entitled to the supply of a copy thereof.
The Forty-Second Amendment has not brought about any change in this position."
Question doing rounds right now is as to whether the case is hand is covered by the ratio laid down in Mohd.
Ramzan's case.
5.
The judgment in Mohd Ramzan's case was delivered on 20111990 and since, according to the learned counsel for the appellant, the order of punishment (Ex. P-1) in this case was passed prior to that i.e. on 1091985, the laid down in Mohd.
Ramzan's case would not be applicable.
6.
Learned counsel for the respondents has argued that the law laid down by the Supreme Court in Mohd.
Ramzan's case would also be applicable to all the cases which were sub-judice in some courts of law on that date.
7.
The abovesaid controversy was set at rest by the Full Bench of this Court in DL Katyal, Accounts Executive v. The Indian Drugs and Pharmaceutical Limited and others, 1993(1) PLR 382 : 1993(2) S.C.T.
655 and it was held vide para No. 10 of the judgment that the law laid down by the Supreme Court in Mohd.
Ramzan's case is to apply prospectively.
8.
As mentioned above, the impugned order of punishment (Ex. P-1) was passed on 1091985 whereas the judgment in Mohd Ramzan's case (supra) was delivered on 20111990 and, therefore, in view of the ratio laid down in BL Katyal's case (supra) the ratio of Mohd.
Ramzan's case would not apply to the facts of this case.
Under these circumstances, the judgment and decree of the First Appellate Court cannot be sustained and are, therefore, set aside and that of the Court in the first instance dated 28.8.1989 restored.
The suit of the plaintiff is dismissed.
In the result, this Regular Second Appeal is allowed.
The parties are, however, left to bear their own costs in this appeal.