V K Bali, J - Dr Vandana Midha, petitioner through present writ filed by her under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, seeks admission to MD course in Dayanand Medical College & Hospital, Ludhiana, affiliated to Panjab University, Chandigarh.
Since the matter required immediate attention, it was admitted to a regular hearing on 1781993 and was ordered to be listed for 2381993.
2.
During the course of arguments, I am informed that as to whether Dayanand Medical College and Hospital is a State or instrumentality of the State within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of India is subject matter of decision by Full Bench of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 8890 of 1989.
I am further informed that decision of earlier Full Bench of this Court in Gurpreet Singh v. Panjab University, AIR 1983 Punjab & Haryana, 70, has been doubted and for that precise reason, the matter has now been referred to a larger bench.
3.
In Civil Writ Petition No. 8890 of 1989, Miss Kavita v. Dayanand Medical College & Ors.,1998(4) S.C.T.
740 : 1998(3) S.C.T.
51 dismissal of another Civil Writ Petition No. 5391 of 1989, Dr. Vandana Setia v. The Dayanand Medical College and Hospital, Ludhiana was noticed.
The abovesaid writ petition was dismissed with the following observations :-  "If we admit the petition here ultimately the matter may have to be referred to a Full Bench of more than 3 Judges as the decision reported in AIR 1983 Punjab & Haryana was rendered by 3 Judges.
Instead, the safer course for the petitioner is to move the Supreme Court directly under Article 32 of the Constitution of India so that the matter is decided once for all as to whether writ against Daya Nand College, a private non-aided Medical College is maintainable or not.
This matter is already sub-judice there in writ petition No. 9314 of 1983."
Dr. Vandana Setia then approached the Supreme Court where in the aforesaid order of this Court was reversed and she was directed to be admitted to MD Course (Radio Diagnosis).
In view of this fact, as noticed above, the Division Bench admitted Civil Writ Petition 8890 of 1989 to a Full Bench to reconsider Gurpreet Singh's case (supra).
The Full Bench, however, did not proceed with the matter and rather thought it appropriate that it will not be useful to constitute a larger Bench of more than three Judges to reconsider the judgment of Full Bench of three judges.
It was further deemed appropriate to advise Dayanand Medical College and Hospital to approach the Supreme Court for early decision of the writ petition in which the correctnes of the said decision was also under consideration.
This order was passed by the Full Bench of three Judges on 4121989.
Learned counsel for the parties inform me that the Supreme Court has not taken final decision so far and the matter is still pending before it.
4.
The learned counsel appearing for petitioner on the basis of decision in Unni Krishnan JP v. State of Andhra Pradesh, 1993(1) SLR 743 : 1993(2) SCT 512 contends that as to whether Dayanand Medical College and Hospital is a State within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of India or not is not of much consequence as it has been held by the Supreme Court that "recognised" affiliated private educational institutions, supplement the function performed by the institutions of the State.
Their is not an independent activity but one closely allied to and supplemental to the activity of the State."
It has been further held that the "private educational institutions merely supplement the effort of the State in educating the people, as explained above.
It is not an independent activity.
It is an activity supplemental to the principal activity carried on by the State.
No private educational institution can survive or subsist without recognition and/or affiliation."
The learned counsel also relies upon Shri Anadi Mukta Sadguru Shree Muktajee Vadasiswami Survarna Jayanti Mahotsav Samarak Trust v. VR Rudani, AIR 1989 SC 1607 to contend that writ of mandamus is not confined to statutory authorities and instrumentalities of the State and the same can also be issued to any other person or authority performing public duty and the duty need not be imposed by Statute.
5.
I am prima-facie in agreement with the contention raised by learned counsel for the petitioner but in view of the fact that the precise question as to whether Dayanand Medical College & Hospital is a State or any other authority within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of India, is pending decision before a Full Bench of this Court, it will not be appropriate for me sitting singly to determine the controversy.
However, in view of two later decisions of the Supreme Court, as have been noticed above, it may not be necessary to await the decision of the Supreme Court.
Admissions or non- admissions, as the case may be, year after year, are resulting into filing of number of petitions in this court and obviously, in almost all the cases prayer for provisional admission is made.
Whereas non-grant of provisional admission to the petitioners would render their cause infructuous, grant thereof would result into creation of additional seats by Dayanand Medical College & Hospital, thus, forcing it to face a great deal of hardship.
I am, thus, of the considered view that his matter be now placed before My Lord the Chief Justice for constituting a Full Bench preferably of five Judges.
6.
Before I part with this order, I would like to deal with the interim prayer contained in the writ petition.
The Motion Bench admitted the matter on 1781993 and ordered that since the matter concerns admission, same be listed for hearing on 2381993.
Since I am referring this case to My Lord the Chief Justice for constituting a Full Bench, it is certain that the case cannot be finalised as desired by the Motion Bench.
Petitioner is admittedly higher in merit from all those who have been admitted against seven seats in general medicines.
She obtained 12161 marks and as per the case set up in the petition, she was entitled to admission in the speciality of her choice i.e. MD (Medicine) as none of the candidates having more marks, had been admitted.
I, thus, order that she be provisionally admitted to MD (Medicines), which admission, of course, shall be subject to decision of this writ petition.
Dasti as well.