VK Bali, J - This order will dispose of three connected writ petition Nos. CWP 1118 of 1992, CWP 1120 of 1992 and CWP 1119 of 1991 as common questions of law are involved in these writ petitions.
The facts, however, are being taken from C.W.P.
No. 1118 of 1991.
2.
Babu Ram who though has been reinstated vide award rendered by the Labour Court Annexure P-1 dated 13th of August 1991, has felt aggrieved on issue No. 2 i.e. with regard to payment of back wages inasmuch as the Labour Court even after holding that the management had failed to prove that the petitioner workman remained gainfully employeed during the period of this enforced idleness, yet granted only 60% of the back wages.
Before matter is proceeded further, it may be mentioned that whereas the workman has challenged the denial of part back wages to him, the respondent-management has remained contended with reinstatement of the petitioner and payment of 60% back wages to him.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondent-management, PGI all that is said to deny the relief claimed by the petitioner in this petition is that he was employed as a daily wager.
4.
After hearing the learned counsel for the petitioner and going through the records of the case, I am of the considered view that the matter is covered in favour of the petitioner by a number of judgments rendered by the Supreme Court on the issue and also a Full Bench judgment of this Court.
In Hindustan Tin Works Pvt. Ltd. v. Employees of Hindustan Tin Works Pvt. Ltd. 1979(1) SCR 563 it was held that "ordinarily, therefore, a workman whose service has been illegally terminated, would be entitled to full back wages except to the extent he was gainfully employed during the forced idleness.
That is the normal rule.
Any other view could be a premium on the unwarranted litigative activity of the employer."
It was further held that when the termination of service was neither proper nor justified, it would not only show that the workmen were always willing to serve but if they rendered service they would legitimately be entitled to the wages for the same.
If the workman were always ready to work but they were kept away therefrom on account of invalid act of the employer, there is no justification for not awarding them full back wages which were very legitimately due to them.
This view was also followed by a Full Bench of this Court in Hari Palace Ambala City v. The President Officer, Labour Court, Rohtak, 1979(3) SLR 223.
The onus to prove that the workman was gainfully employed during the period he remained out of service is always upon the management as was held by the Supreme Court in Shambu Nath Goyal v. Bank of Baroda, 1983(4) SCC 491.
All that has been pleaded by the respondent-management in the written statement is that a Division Bench of this Court in CWP No. 472 of 1991 decided on 10th of May 1991, held that the workman is entitled to full back wages in similar circumstances but the said decision is subject matter of the appeal before the Supreme Court and that payment of back wages in excess of 60% had been stayed.
5.
In view of the fact that the law is well settled by Supreme Court that the workman is entitled to full back wages during the period of his enforced idleness, this petition has to be allowed.
For the reasons recorded above, award of the Labour Court is modified to the extent that the petitioner will be entitled to full back wages from the date when his services were terminated and till such time when he was reinstated in the service.