J S Sekhon, J(Oral) - In Civil Writ Petition No. 12079 of 1992 preferred by Amardeep Singh Sihota, petitioner, vide order (copy Annexure P-1) on November 27, 1992, this Bench had directed the respondents to give provisional admission to the petitioner at Medical College, Patiala, at his own risk and responsibility, subject to the final decision of the writ petition.
2.
Thereafter, on notice, the respondents moved an application for modification/vacation of ad-interim order granting provisional admission.
This Bench vide order (Copy Annexure A-1) dated December 18, 1992, referred the controversy in the main writ petition to the appropriate Bench in view of the sensitive issue of admission to MBBS/BDS courses from sports category.
The above referred application of the respondents for modifying the ad-interim direction regarding provisional admission granted to Amardeep Singh Sihota was also referred to the Full Bench for considering the desirability of modifying or vacating the ad-interim order.
3.
The Full Bench vide its order (Annexure A-12) dated May 19, 1993, upheld the right of the State Government to formulate the policy regarding the admission to MBBS/B.D.S.
Courses in sports category subject to the rider that selected candidates should at least get 35% marks in the pre-entrance test.
The Full Bench, however, kept intact the provisional admission of those students who had got provisional admission under the orders of this Court, in view of the fluid legal situation qua the principles of admission as different Benches had taken different views and that the candidates should not suffer in their studies and allowed them to continue as regular students.
4.
It is noteworthy that the petitioner had filed this contempt petition much prior to the reference of the case to the larger Bench of this Court as the concerned respondents had not obeyed the orders of this Court dated November 27, 1992, granting provisional admission, but on the request of the learned counsel for the petitioner, the contempt petition was kept in abeyance till the decision of the Full Bench of this Court.
Under these circumstances, the contempt petition has been taken up as the matter was required to be considered in the light of the Full Bench decision of this Court.
5.
Mr. S S Saron, the learned Deputy Advocate-General, contends that the observations of the Full Bench qua the provisional admission would not be applicable to the case of the petitioner but it will cover only the case of those students who had actually joined the course on the basis of the provisional admission granted by this Court.
Sh. Hardayal Singh, Principal, Government Medical College, Amritsar-respondent No. 4, had also filed an affidavit disclosing that eight students were granted provisional admission vide different orders of different Benches of this Court.
6.
Mr. Patwalia, on the other hand, contends that the Full Bench had kept intact the order of provisional admission of the petitioner in view of the specific reference of this Bench.
7.
To properly understand the import of the judgment of the Full Bench, it would be worthwhile to reproduce the relevant paragraph of the judgment, which reads as under:-  "We have now to consider the question in regard to those students who though they are not entitled to be admitted within the principles laid down by us but have been granted provisional admission due to orders passed by this Court.
In regard to these students also since the law was wholly unsettled and there were different decisions by different Benches of this Court in regard to the principles of admission, they should not be made to suffer in the interests of justice and they be also permitted to continue their course in the Medical Colleges as regular students."
8.
A bare glance through the above referred observations of Full Bench leaves no doubt that although ordinarily the literal meaning thereof would protect only those candidates who had already joined the course under the orders of this Court who/granting them provisional admission, yet all the same under the circumstances of the case in hand this portion of the order has to be read in the light of the reference of this Bench, wherein the question of modifying or vacating the order granting provisional admission to Amardeep Singh Sihota was also referred to the Full Bench for necessary orders.
Admittedly, no other petitioner in all the three writ petitions before the Full Bench was granted such provisional admission.
Thus, obviously the above referred portion of the order of the Full Bench pertains to Amardeep Singh Sihota, petitioner, in CWP No. 12079 of 1992.
9.
Keeping in view that the respondents should not be allowed to take benefit of their wrong in disobeying the order of this Court directing them to provisionally admit the petitioner and the circumstances referred above, there is no option but to hold that the provisional admission granted to the petitioner by this Court has been approved by the Full Bench.
The respondents are, therefore, directed to give regular admission in MBBS Course to the petitioner for 1993-94 Sessions as earlier academic session is almost over.
Keeping in view the fluid legal position, there is no justification for proceedings further under the Contempt of Courts Act.
The rule nisi is discharged.
It is further clarified that the above referred observations have been made on the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case and the same shall not be treated as precedent.
The aforesaid order also disposed of Civil Misc. No. 4996-CII of 1993.