SS Grewal, J - This petition as well as COCP No. 242 of 1992 re: Kewal Krishan v. Green Gold Eucalyptus etc. through its Managing Director, relate to almost similar facts and shall be disposed of by one order.
2.
According to allegations of the petitioner undertaking was given by Mr. VR Atri, Managing Director of respondent-company namely M/s. Green Gold Eucalyptus Limited on 891989 in the court of Senior Subordinate Judge, Chandigarh, in Civil Suits Nos. 198 of 2881989 and 197 of 28.8.1989, to the effect that the terms and conditions of the agreement/appointment letter of the plaintiff will not be changed and will continue working as per the terms and conditions of the agreement/appointment letter.
Further undertaking was given whereby the defendant company agreed to pay the amount of commission payable to the plaintiff by the company shortly, and that the plaintiff (i.e. petitioner) in each case shall continue receiving the amount of compensation regularly before the 10th of each month.
On the basis of the said statement as well as statement of the counsel for the plaintiff, a decree was passed by the said court, wherein it was specifically mentioned that the parties shall be bound by their statements.
3.
It was further alleged in the contempt petition that the respondent company failed to pay him the amount of compensation/commission with effect from 1101991 onwards which tentatively works out to Rs. 80,000/-.
Secondly even though the petitioner had submitted two representations on 7th of February, 1992 addressed to the Director of the respondent-Company, wherein a request was made for making payment of commission/compensation/pension the respondent showing wilful disobedience to the judgment and decree of the Civil Court dated 891989 dispensed with the services of the petitioner on the same day i.e. 721992.
4.
It was further alleged in the replication that the order dated 721992, referred to above, was challenged by the petitioners in two other Civil Suits filed by the individual petitioners and the orders of termination of services of the petitioners were set aside, vide judgment and decree dated 191992, and the respondent-company also undertook to pay the arrears of commission and other emoluments which were not paid to the petitioner after 1st of October, 1991.
5.
The stand taken by the respondent-company is to the effect that neither any wilful disobedience of the civil court decree passed in this case, by the respondent-company has been committed, nor the latter committed any such wilful dis-obedience of the undertaking given on behalf of the respondent-company in the trial court.
It was further pleaded that the civil Court decree dated 891989 was passed on the basis of compromise wherein, it was specifically mentioned that the services of the petitioner were terminated due to mistake.
7.
The learned counsel for the parties were heard at length.
A perusal of the judgment and decree dated 891989 (Annexures P2 and P3) shows that the same are quite vague and no specific decree has actually been passed by the court of Senior Subordinate Judge, Chandigarh.
It was merely mentioned that the decree has been passed, as prayed for.
8.
It is true that services of the petitioners in each case were terminated on 721992 by the respondent-company.
Again on the basis of the compromise 'effected between the parties, the petitioner in each case was reinstated.
Perusal of the compromise Annexure P-8 does not in any manner indicate that the respondent-company or its officials including the present respondents had wilfully or deliberately dispensed with the services of the petitioners or had committed any other violation of earlier undertaking given in the said case.
Bare reading of the said compromise does not in any manner indicate that any wilful civil contempt has been committed by the respondents by dispensing with the services of the petitioner on 721992.
9.
In para.
No. 1(b) of the said compromise it is specifically mentioned that the dispute had arisen on account of mistaken and wrong stand of the representative of the defendant-company on account of which the plaintiff has been made to suffer for the intervening period.
It is quite evident that the services of the petitioners were terminated due to mistake and wrong stand of the respondent-company and not because of any wilful disobedience of the earlier order passed by the Civil Court.
The respondent company also agreed to cancel the impugned order dated 721992, whereby the appointment of the plaintiff as Development Director of the defendant-company was cancelled and further undertook to pay monthly commission to the plaintiff (i.e. present petitioner) on or before 7th day of each month together with interest.
10.
Faced with this situation, it was further contended on behalf of the petitioner that the decretal amount on the basis of civil court decree referred to above has not been so far paid by the respondent-company to the individual petitioners after 1101991.
This too would not constitute any wilful disobedience of the order of the Civil Court or the undertaking given on behalf of the respondent-company referred to above.
It would be open for the petitioner to execute the civil court decree in his favour.
Mere non- execution of the Civil Court decree would not constitute civil contempt, as far as the facts and circumstances of the present case are concerned.
For the foregoing reasons, there is no cogent reason to proceed further with contempt proceedings.
The rule already issued in this case is hereby discharged and the contempt proceedings against the respondent are directed to be dropped.
Both the petitions are accordingly dismissed.