Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - On December 31, 1976, the Haryana State Electricity Board (hereinafter referred to as 'the Board') inter alia decided that in the case of promotion to the post of Assistant Engineers against 5% quota reserved for AMIE qualified candidates if "at the time of selection, a senior man is passed over on the grounds of lack of qualification and on his acquisition of these qualifications, he is promoted in a subsequent selection, he shall rank senior to the earlier promoted junior man unless in the meantime the earlier promoted junior man has been confirmed against a post in the promoted rank".
On October 16, 1989, the Board inter alia found that "this decision is repugnant to the provisions of Regulation 15(l) of PSEB Service of Engineers (Electricity) Recruitment Regulations 1965 ......." and rescinded it retrospectively with effect from "the date of its issue."
As a result, the Board called upon the appellants to show cause "as to why the proposed action for placing you at seniority No. 478-A on the basis of the date of officiation ......." be not passed.
Aggrieved by this action, the appellants filed Civil Writ Petition No. 9357 of 1990 inter alia praying that a writ of certiorari or any other appropriate writ, order or direction be issued quashing the decision taken by the Board in its meeting held on October 16, 1989 as also for the quashing of the Show Cause Notices issued to them.
Three other writ petitions had also been filed.
Civil Writ Petition No 2584 of 1987 had been filed by Charanjit Singh Nanda and eight other persons claiming promotion as Assistant Engineers with effect from a date prior to October 1, 1974 viz. the date with effect from which Shri Prithvi Singh who was junior to them as Junior Engineer was deemed to have been promoted as Assistant Engineer in view of the decision of the Board dated December 31, 1976.
Civil Writ Petition Nos. 2244 of 1986 and 3275 of 1987 had been filed by M/s Vijay Kumar Garg and others and Ashwani Kumar Talwar respectively.
They challenged the promotion and the grant of seniority to Prithvi Singh and others on the basis of the order dated December 31, 1976.
They also prayed for the quashing of the decision taken by the Board in the meeting held on December 31, 1976.
The learned Single Judge who heard all the four cases together found that the decision taken by the Board in the year 1976 was merely an executive order and not a regulation framed under Section 79 of the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948 and was contrary to the provisions of the Regulation 15 of the Punjab State Electricity Board Regulations, 1965 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Regulations'), the seniority of the Assistant Engineer to be determined strictly in accordance with Regulation 15 and that the decision of the Board dated October 16, 1989 was valid.
As a result of these conclusions, Civil Writ Petition Nos. 2584 of 1987 and 9357 of 1990 were dismissed while Civil Writ Petition Nos. 2244 of 1986 and 3275 of 1987 filed by the direct recruits were allowed and a direction was given to the Board "to re-fix the seniority of the Assistant Engineers strictly in accordance with Regulation 15(1) aforesaid by ignoring the above instructions as stated above."
Curiously, the appellants have chosen to file an appeal only against the judgment in Civil Writ Petition No. 9357 of 1990.
No appeal having been filed against the decision in Civil Writ Petitions Nos. 2244 of 1986 and 3275 of 1987 inspite of the fact that one of the appellants was a party thereto, the judgment in these cases has become final.
2.
In this appeal, the primary questions that arise for consideration are: (i) Does the decision taken by the Board in its meeting held on December 31, 1976 amount to a Regulation framed under Section 79 of the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948, thus amending the provisions of Regulation 15 ?
; Or (ii) Was this decision a mere executive order which being repugnant to Regulation 15 was void?
(iii) Did the decision taken by the Board in its meeting held on October 16, 1989 rescinding the decision dated December 31, 1976 (which was issued by the Board vide its letter dated January 4, 1977) retrospectively with effect from the date of its issue taken away the vested rights of the appellants and was thus illegal.
For answering these questions, a few facts may be noticed.
3.
The appellants joined the Board in the cadre of Line Superintendents or Draftsman.
The designation of the post of Line Superintendent was later on changed to that of Junior Engineer.
The appellants were promoted against the posts reserved for the AMIE qualified Junior Engineers on different dates between December 6, 1977 and November 27, 1979.
The appellants aver that some Junior Engineers who were junior to them were promoted as Assistant Engineer prior to their promotion as they had passed the AMIE Examination earlier than them.
However, in view of the decision taken by the board in its meeting held on December 31, 1976, the appellants were given seniority above persons who had been promoted earlier than these.
It is further averred that "certain directly recruited Engineers have challenged the grant of the benefit of seniority to the petitioners (appellants) as also the vires of the order Annexure P-2 in this Hon'ble Court by filing CWP No. 2244 of 1986 and CWP No. 3275/87.
In these writ petitions the grant of the benefit to the petitioners as also the policy Annexure P-2 is under challenge.
The petitioners No. 1, 2 and 4 have been joined as respondents in the said writ petitions."
In April 1990, after the Board had rescinded the decision of December 31, 1976, Show Cause Notices were issued to the appellants calling upon them to explain as to why the benefit of seniority granted to them be not withdrawn.
Aggrieved by the action of the Board in withdrawing the "promotion policy Annexure P-2, with retrospective effect and the show cause notices Annexure P-5 to P-10 served on" the appellants, they approached this Court through the writ petition out of which the present appeal has arisen.
4.
Junior Engineers and Head Draftsmen are eligible for promotion to the post of Assistant Engineer in accordance with the provisions of the Regulations.
These Regulations were framed by the Punjab State Electricity Board on September 1, 1965 vide No. 35/Regulation 25-A/PSEB "in exercise of the powers conferred by Clause (c) of Section 79 of the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948 ..... governing recruitment and conditions of Service of persons appointed to the Punjab State Electricity Board Service of Engineers (Electrical) ........" Admittedly, these regulations were adopted by the Haryana State Electricity Board.
Under Regulation 3, the Service is to comprise of the posts specified in Appendix `A' which also includes the posts of Assistant Engineers.
Regulation 6 inter alia provides for the methods of appointment to the posts of Assistant Engineers viz. direct recruitment, by promotion and transfer of officers already in the service of a Government or any other State Electricity Board or an undertaking of the Government.
Qualifications for direct appointment are laid down in Regulation 8.
Appointment by promotion is governed by Regulation 9 which inter alia provides that 7% of the total strength of Assistant Engineers shall be filled by promoting "Engineering Subordinates who are Bachelor of Engineering or AMIE during the Service of the Board ....." Regulation 11 inter alia provides that "appointment by promotion shall be made on the basis of merit and suitability in all respects with due regard to' seniority.
No officer shall have any claim to promotion as a matter of right on the basis of mere seniority."
Regulation 15 deals with the determination of inter se seniority of the members 1 of the Service.
It provides as under :-  15.
SENIORITY  The seniority of the members of the Service shall be determined as follows :  (1) PRIOR TO CONFIRMATION : The seniority inter se of members of the service in a particular class of post viz. Assistant Engineer, Assistant Executive Engineer, Executive Engineer, Superintending Engineers, Additional' Chief Engineers and Chief Engineers, shall be determined by the date of their continuous appointments in that class:  Provided, firstly, that in the case of members appointed by direct appointment the order of merit determined by the Board shall not be disturbed so far as the seniority in the class of post to which direct appointment was made is concerned, and persons appointed as a result of an earlier selection shall be senior to those appointed as a result of subsequent selection.
Provided, secondly, that in the case of two or more members appointed on the same date, seniority shall be determined as follows :-  (a) In the order of the salaries allowed to them on such date, the higher paid being placed above the lower paid or if both the date of appointment and the salary be the same, in the order of age, the older being placed above the younger, and  (b) In the case of members of the Service appointed as Assistant Engineers and above by promotion according to their relative seniority in the lower class from which they were promoted unless a member of a lower class is promoted earlier than another member of that class who is senior to him and the latter has been passed over on the score of unsuitability or ineligibility for promotion, including refusal to undergo Thermal Training and/or to work in Thermal Plants, unless exempted, in which case the member of the lower class first promoted shall take rank in the higher class, above such other members of the lower class if and when the latter is promoted as Assistant Engineer and/or above:  Provided thirdly, that a member of the service who is appointed as Assistant Engineer by direct appointment shall be senior to all members of the Service appointed as Assistant Engineer by promotion from the Subordinate Class who maybe appointed to the service after the appointed of any member by direct appointment in the same batch of selection.
Provided fourthly, that the senior of a member of the service appointed by transfer shall be determined by the Board the merits of each case.
Provided, fifthly, that if a member of the Service is promoted temporarily to a post earlier than his senior, for reasons other than the inefficiency of the senior person or his ineligibility for promotion they will rank inter se according to their relative seniority in the class from which they were promoted.
(2) AFTER CONFIRMATION : Those who have been confirmed in a class, according to their respective date of confirmation.
Provided that where two or more members are confirmed on the same date, they shall retain the order in which they stood with respect to each other immediately prior to confirmation."
5.
On December 31, 1976, a decision was taken by the Board which is contained in Annexure P-2 with the writ petition.
It reads as under :  "The Board in its meeting held on 311276 agreed with the proposal made in the memorandum and decided that promotion to the post of Assistant Engineers against 5% quota reserved for AMIE qualified candidates, be made in the manner indicated below:  (a) Subject to the possession of the twin qualification at the time of the selection the inter se seniority of persons in the promoted rank shall be fixed according to their original seniority in the lower rank.
(b) In case at the time of selection a senior man is passed over on the grounds of lack of qualification and on his acquisition of these qualification, he is promoted in a subsequent selection, he shall rank senior to the earlier promoted junior man unless in the meantime the earlier promoted junior man has been confirmed against a post in the promoted rank.
(c) Since promotion against 5% quota reserved for AMIE qualified persons is available not only to Line Superintendent, but is also (been) to other category of staff who pass AMIE examination e.g. SSA, AEM draftsman Test Inspectors, etc. the inter se seniority of persons drawn from different categories (in both eventualities (a) and (b) above) shall be determined on the basis of the scale of pay in the lower rank."
6.
On October 16, 1989, the Board took the following decisions :  "Subject: CWP 7892 of 1989 Shri SS Chauhan v. HSEB-Fixation of Seniority.
A proposal in regard to the rescinding of decision taken by the Board in its meeting held on dated 21.12.76 was placed before the Whole Time Members for consideration on 16101989 (Annexure `A').
After deliberation, the whole Time Members have decided as under:  1.
The decision dated 21121976 is hereby withdrawn for the following reasons retrospectively i.e. from the date of its issue -  a) That this decision was originally received by the US/Est.
and not by the US/Regulation Section and it was never made a part of the regulations so that it has the effect of being executive instructions only.
b) that this decision does not allow finality of the seniority list of AE's at any stage and as a result, the seniority has remained in a constant state of flux.
On the other hand, it has allowed undue accelerated promotion to some inasmuch as more A.Es.
from AMIE channel get seniority than their quota allowed.
It also affected the seniority of A.Es.
recruited from other channels adversely.
c) that this decision is repugnant to the provisions of Regulation 15(1) of PSEB Service of Engineers (Elect) Recruitment Regulation, 1965 which existed that, time and those which exist now.
2.
That the representations of Shri SS Chauhan, in view of this decision is rejected.
Other similar representations also stand rejected.
3.
That action according to law be taken in the matter of re-fixation of seniority of those who have already been given benefit under the above decision dated 21121976.
4.
That the matter be placed before the Board for rectification.
In view of the decision taken by the Whole-Time Members the decision of the Board taken in its meeting held on 21121976 and conveyed vide U.O.
No. 2/M-145(18) dated 411977 has been withdrawn vide U.O.
No. CH-134/EBG-1918 dated 171089 (Annexure 'B').
Accordingly, the representation dated 2111988 of Shri SS Chauhan, AE has been rejected vide Memo No. CH-1/EBG-1918 dated 17101989 (Annexure `C').
The Board is requested to kind accord its approval."
7.
It was in pursuance to the above decision that the impugned show cause notices were issued to the appellants.
The challenge to the impugned orders having failed, the appellants have come up in the present appeal.
8.
It may also be noticed that Civil Miscellaneous Application No. 76 of 1992 was filed by M/s. Ashwani Kumar Talwar and Rakesh Kumar for being impleaded as respondents in the appeal.
Similarly, another Civil Miscellaneous Application No. 105 of 1992 was filed by M/s RN Gupta and Sushil Kumar.
Notices of these applications were given to the learned counsel for the appellants.
Reply thereto was filed.
Keeping in view the facts as mentioned in these applications, we heard the learned counsel for the applications, we heard the learned counsel for the applicants.
No objection was raised to their being impleaded as respondents.
Consequently, we formally record that both the applications are allowed and the applicants are impleaded as respondents Nos. 2 to 5 in the appeal.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties.
9.
Mr. PS Patwalia, learned counsel for the appellants, has vehemently contended that the decision taken by the Board in its meeting held on December 3, 1976 (Annexure P-2) was a Regulation made under Section 79 of the Act and had the effect of amending Regulations 15.
He has further contended that the decision of the Board dated October 16, 1989 by which the vested right of the appellants were taken away is repugnant to the provisions of Section 79 and cannot thus be sustained.
This claim was controverted by the learned counsel for the respondents.
10.
Mr. Ashok Aggarwal, learned counsel for the Board, has very fairly produced before us the relevant record.
A photo copy of the Memorandum which was put up to the Board in pursuance to which the decision was taken in the meeting held on December 31, 1976 was produced by him.
It has been taken on record as Mark (Pages 1 to 5).
11.
A perusal of this Memorandum shows that vide order dated August 9, 1974, quota had been laid down for filling up the posts of Assistant Engineers.
It had been provided that 65% posts shall be filled up by direct recruitment; 20% by promotion from amongst Diploma holders; 5% by promotion from amongst AMIEs; and 10% by promotion from Drawing Staff, non-Diploma holders etc.
Complications had arisen in implementing this decision with regard to the promotion from the category of Diploma holders and the AMIEs.
It was observed that "since the decision of the Board which resulted in the issue of office order dated 981974 did not deal with the various difficulties enumerated above, the matter is placed before the Board for decision on the policy to be followed in implementing the earlier decision."
In pursuance to this Memorandum the Board took the decision contained in Annexure P-2 to the petition in its meeting held on December 31, 1976.
It is noteworthy that in the Memorandum, there was no reference to the provisions of the 1965 Regulations.
There was no proposal for the amendment thereof.
It cannot thus be said that the Board was at all seized of a proposal for the amendment of the Regulations.
A perusal of memorandum shows that it was only to resolve the difficulties experienced by the office in implementing the order regarding the fixation of quota that the matter was placed before the Board for consideration.
It thus appears clear to us that the Board was not even considering a proposal for the amendment of the Regulations.
12.
Mr. PS Patwalia, learned counsel for the appellants, however, contended that the policy decision of the Board amounts to a Regulation under Section 79 of the Act.
It is undoubtedly correct that Section 79 inter alia provides that "the Board may make Regulations" for laying down "the duties of officers and other employees of the Board and their salaries, allowances and other conditions of Service."
However it cannot be held that every decision of the Board was amounted to a Regulation.
There is an essential distinction between a Regulation and an executive or Regulation operates as law by its own force.
The essential ingredient of law is that it must be in exercise of a power and should be made known to all those persons who are likely to be affected by it.
In Sukhdev Singh v. Bhagat Ram, 1975(1) SLR 605: AIR 1975 (C) 1331, their Lordships of the Supreme Court were pleased to observe in paragraph 24 that "the distinction between rules and regulations on the one hand and administrative instructions on the other is that rules or regulations can be made only after reciting the source of power whereas administrative instructions are not issued a source of power."
The order passed by the Board in the meeting held on December 31, 1976 does at all refer to Section 79 of Act.
As against that we find that the various amendments issued thereto from time to time clearly open with the words ..." In exercise of the powers conferred by Clause (c) of Section 79 of the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948 .. . Board is pleased to make the following regulations .... or" .. ... make the following amendments in the Punjab State Electricity Board Service of Engineers (Electrical) Recruitment Regulations, 1965 (as applicable to the HSEB)."
On a perusal of the order dated December 31, 1976 which has been reproduced above, we find that there is no reference to Section 79 of the Act.
Source of power has not been recited.
13.
Another essential ingredient of law is that it must be duly published.
It must be made known to all those persons who are likely to be affected by it.
This aspect was considered in detail in Talwinder Singh Behal v. The Punjab State Electricity Board, by MM Punchhi, J His Lordship was pleased to observe as under in paragraph 8 :  "But since regulations are subordinate legislation having the strength and efficacy of law, these would become operative only if promulgated, published or broadcast in some recognisable way, so that persons affected thereby could acquire knowledge of them with some exercise of due and reasonable diligence.
The necessity of such a course to be adopted was noticed by the Supreme Court in Harla v. State of Rajasthan, AIR 1961 SC 467, and it was held that the rules of natural justice required that before a law could become operative, it must be promulgated or published in some reasonable way but the mode of publication could vary and this view consistently has been follow ever since.
In Sukhdev Singh v. Bhagat Ram Sardas Singh Reghuvanshi, 1975(1) SLR 605 : AIR 1975 (SC) 1331 the Supreme Court, drawing distinction between rules and regulations on the one hand ... and instructions on the other pointed out that rules and regulations could only be made after reciting the source of power, whereas administrative instructions were not issued after reciting the source of power."
14.
It is thus clear that to operate as a Regulation, decision of the Board must be "promulgated, published or broadcast in some recognisable way."
On a perusal of the order issued by the Board viz. Annexure P-2, we do not find any evidence of its 'promulgation', 'publication' or 'broadcasting.'
In fact Mr. Ashok Aggarwal, learned counsel for the respondent-Board produced copies of various amendments to the Regulations issued by the Board from time to time to show that these not only recite the source of power viz.
Section 79 of the Act but were also duly published by being circulated to the various authorities.
Copies in some cases were sent even to the President of the Engineers' Association.
The compilation of the Regulations as well as the amendments issued by the Haryana State Electricity Board from time to time is taken on record as Mark `B' (Pages I to 42).
15.
On a perusal of these amendments, the distinction between the order passed on December 31, 1976 on the one hand and the amendments or regulations issued by the Board from time to time is absolutely clear.
We are clearly of the opinion that the decision taken by the Board in the meeting held on December 31, 1976 which was issued on January 4, 1977 is only an administrative order and not a Regulation under Section 79 of the Act.
16.
Does this order run counter the provisions Regulation 15 ?
17.
A perusal of the provision contained in Regulation 15 shows that the seniority of the members of the Service has to "be determined by the dates of their continuous appointments."
The second proviso also contemplates that if a senior person is superseded on account of eligibility or suitability then he would not get seniority over the junior person who has been promoted earlier.
As against this, the order dated December 31, 1976 inter alia provides that "in case, at the time of selection, a senior man is passed over on grounds of lack of qualifications and on his acquisition of those qualifications, he is promoted in a subsequent selection, he shall rank senior to the earlier promoted junior man, unless, in the meantime, the earlier promoted junior man has been confirmed against a post in the promoted rank."
It thus clearly gives a go-bye to the Rule of determination of seniority on the basis of the date of continuous appointment.
While Regulation 15 provides that a person promoted earlier shall rank senior to a person promoted later, the decision of the Board lays down that the seniority of the lower rank shall be reflected in the higher rank.
According to the decision of the Board, even a person promoted 10 years later than a junior would be entitled to the restoration of seniority if the junior person has not been already confirmed in the higher post.
The conflict between the Regulation and the Order is obvious.
Is such an order valid?
18.
It is well settled that executive orders can supplement statutory rules or regulations.
However, only gaps can be filled up.
The lacuna in the Regulations can be supplemented by issue of executive orders.
The executive instructions cannot, however, run counter to the statutory Regulations.
In the present case, there was no gap or lacuna in the Regulations.
The decision of the Board was clearly contrary to the Regulations.
It was thus wholly void.
In fact, the order is totally arbitrary inasmuch as it permits a person promoted years later to be declared senior to a person who dad been promoted many years earlier.
We have thus no hesitation in holding that the executive order passed by the Board was clearly contrary to the statutory Regulations and was thus void.
19.
There is another aspect of the matter.
Under the Regulations, Junior Engineers or the members of the Drawing Establishment are eligible to be considered for promotion to the posts of Assistant Engineers.
A further provision has been made that those who qualify the AMIE Examination shall be entitled to a separate quota in the matter of promotion.
In other words, the acquisition of the qualification of AMIE (which has been considered as equivalent to a degree), entitles the junior to jump the queue and get an out of turn promotion.
In the very nature of things, a person who acquires the qualification earlier should be entitled to be considered for promotion before a person who acquires the qualification later.
This Rule was clearly enunciated by a Full Bench of the Court in Punjab State Electricity Board, Patiala v. Ashok Kumar Sehgal, AIR 1990 P&H 117.
MM Punchhi, J speaking for the Bench was pleased to observe as under in paragraph 33 :  "The office order dated October 22, 1908 quoted in the published report in Ravinder Kumar Sharma's case (supra) clearly reveals that different conditions of eligibility have been prescribed for diploma-holders, non- diploma holders, Linesmen, the fulfilment of which alone qualifies them to be promoted as Line Superintendent on the basis of seniority, and deducibly as we have culled out, to be reckoned on the date when the post in the promotional cadre falls vacant.
Our deduction is based on pure logic, practical experience, common knowledge, besides precedent.
Suppose a Linesman, be he a diploma-holder or a non diploma holder, acquires eligibility for promotion when no promotional post is available, he inevitably has to wait for one becoming available.
He should normally, on the strength of BS Yadav v. State of Haryana, (1980) 3 Serv.
LR 591 : (1981) Lab IC 104 (SC) get it the day it falls vacant.
But despite that he is not promoted for one reason or the other.
And in the meantime another Linesman, be he a diploma-holder or a non-diploma holder, becomes eligible.
The question then inevitably will crop up, who should get the promotional post.
Should it in these circumstances go to the senior out of the two, even though the senior acquired eligibility later than the junior or should it go to the one who acquired eligibility first.
In this situation, seniority per se cannot be intended to be taken as the basis for promotion, as otherwise, it would lead to undesirable results.
If it is to be dealt otherwise, it would lead to breeding of manipulations, machinations, calculations and caprice.
Designedly the case of promotion of the first eligible can deliberately be kept delayed with oblique motives so as to let suitable rivals come in and in this manner his acquired eligibility can be frustrated by someone senior acquiring eligibility farlate.
Since different conditions of eligibility for promotion from Linesmen to Line Superintendent have been prescribed by the Board on the differences based on the educational qualification-cum-service experience, respectively for non-diploma holders and diploma holders, having regard to the requirements of promotional posts and in the interest of efficiency of service, the eligibility criteria is the first dominant factor and thereafter comes the principle of seniority governing the fate when two equal eligible stake claim to the promotional post.
In that situation the senior person would get the promotional post on both acquiring eligibility on the same date, even though the promotional post falls vacant later."
20.
In view of the above dictum of law, it is clear that a person who becomes eligible earlier gets a right to be considered for promotion before person senior to him who has not acquired the condition of eligibility or has acquired it later than the junior.
In other words, a person who becomes eligible earlier, has to be considered for promotion before a person who becomes eligible later even though the latter may be senior to the former.
Respectfully following the law laid down by the Full Bench, we hold that the order passed by the Board in the meeting held on December 31, 1976 was totally arbitrary and unfair.
21.
It was then contended that the impugned decision of the Board taken in the meeting held on October 16,1989 (Annexure P-4) by which the decision dated December 31,1976 was rescinded, is vitiated as it took away the vested rights of the appellants.
22.
We are unable to accept this contention.
The order passed by the Board in the meeting held on December 31, 1976 was void.
It could thus vest no rights.
Even otherwise, we find that the Board had not finalised the seniority.
No list or order showing that the seniority of Assistant Engineers had been finalised, has been produced.
The seniority has continued to be tentative for more than a decade.
Even the promotions have continued to be provisional.
In such a situation, it cannot be said that a vested right has been taken away by the impugned order.
23.
There is another aspect of the matter.
It is the admitted position that certain persons like respondent No. 2 had been appointed as Assistant Engineer on December 1, 1974 by direct recruitment that time, none of the appellants was even eligible for appointment to the post of Assistant Engineer as they had not qualified the AMIE Examination.
To illustrate, appellant Prithvi Singh had passed the AMIE Examination after December 1974 and was promoted as an Assistant Engineer on December 23, 1977.
By the operation of Regulation 15, respondent No. 2 had become senior to the appellant, Prithvi Singh.
If at all, the respondent had got a vested right to seniority which was sought to be taken away by the passing of the order dated December 31, 1976.
Consequently, the grievance, if any, was that of the respondents.
The appellants cannot claim that their vested rights have been taken away.
24.
Mr. Patwalia, learned counsel for the appellants, was at pains to point out that the Board had assigned deemed of appointment to the appellants in pursuance to its decision dated December 31, 1976 and consequently, the appellants had become senior to the respondents.
He specifically referred to the order passed by a Division Bench of this Court in N.S.
Grewal and others v. Punjab State Electricity Board, Patiala, CWP No. 397 of 1979 to point out that in a similar situation, the memorandum issued by the Board had been held to be a Regulation.
The contention cannot be accepted.
25.
On a perusal of the order which was passed by the Division Bench at the stage of motion hearing, we find that an agenda item had been put up before the Board "to effect the amendments in the Regulation."
Such is not the position in the present case.
We have found as a fact that the Board was not even made aware of the provisions of Regulation 15 when it met to consider the matter on December 31, 1976.
Consequently, the appellants can derive no advantage from the aforesaid decision.
26.
Learned counsel for the appellants also referred to the decision of the Division Bench of this Court in RD Gupta v. The Haryana State Electricity Board, CWP No. 2748 of 1984 decided on October 22, 1984.
On a perusal of the order, we find that the provisions of Regulation 15 or the validity of the order dated December 31, 1976 was not the point in issue before the Bench.
Consequently, learned counsel can derive no advantage from this decision.
27.
Even if it is assumed that the Board had actually acted on the order dated December 31, 1976 and certain cases were decided by this Court on that hypothesis, we are of the opinion that it was always open to the Board to review the matter and rectify the mistake at any stage.
A perusal of the decision dated October 16, 1989 clearly shows that in pursuance to the direction given by this Court in the case of SS Chauhan v. The Haryana State Electricity Board, Civil Writ Petition No. 7892 of 1989, the Board was confronted with the question of considering the validity of its decision dated December 31, 1976.
It found that the order was repugnant to the provisions of Regulation 15 and that the decision did not allow the seniority to get finalised.
These reasons were germane to the issues raised before the Board.
The decision was fair and equitable.
It was not violative of any provision of law.
In our opinion, the Board was only annulling a void order.
Its action was consequently legal and valid.
It was open to the Board to rectify the mistake.
This is precisely what it did.
28.
Accordingly, we hold that the order dated December 31, 1976 was merely an executive order and not a Regulation under Section 79 of the Act.
It did not amount to an amendment of Regulation 15.
It was repugnant to the Regulation and thus void.
We are further of the opinion that the order passed by the Board on October 16, 1989 was valid.
Consequently there was no infirmity in the Show Cause Notices issued by the Board.
29.
Accordingly, we find no merit in this appeal.
It is dismissed.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.