JS Sekhon, J - This order will also dispose of Civil Writ Petition No. 45 of 1986, Civil Writ Petition No. 5433 of 1986, Civil Writ Petition No 6517 of 1986 CWP No. 2261/91 and Civil Writ Petition No. 5938 of 1992 as controversy involved in all these writ petitions is the same.
All these writ petitions are preferred by the Surveyors of the Soil Conservation Department of Punjab clamouring for the same pay scales as are enjoyed by the Surveyors of the Industries Department, Punjab, with effect from 1st of January 1978.
2.
In brief the facts figuring in C.W.P.
No. 650/84 are that the petitioners joined the Department of Soil Conservation and Engineer, Punjab in the year 1970-71 as Surveyors in different places and in different areas.
They claim parity in the pay scales with that of Surveyors working in the Industries and Land Ceiling Departments, Punjab on the doctrine of equal pay for equal work contending that their duties are almost the same as that of Surveyors of the Industries Department as well as Sectional Officers of the Public Works Department, Punjab.
It is further stressed that the basic qualifications required for enrolment for Surveyors in all these departments are almost the same.
The petitioners further contended that the First Pay Commission submitted his report in the year 1968 putting the Surveyors in the Soil Conservation Department in the pay scale of Rs. 450-800/- whereas the Surveyors of the Industries Department of Punjab were given pay scale of 570-1080/-.
Even the draftsmen who are less qualified than the Surveyors have been given the pay scale of Rs. 570-1080/-.
It is further maintained that in the States like West Bengal and Bihar, the Surveyors and draftsmen have been put in the same pay scale due to identical qualification and training.
The greater chances of promotion in the case of draftsmen than that of Surveyors of Soil Conservation Department was also stressed.
The petitioners filed repeated representations to the Department for removing anomalies in their pay scales but failed to get any redress although the Development Commissioner, Punjab respondent No. 2 has also recommended the grant of higher pay scale to the petitioners vide letter dated 2591980 to be Anomaly Committee.
Although the Development Commissioner was also a member of the Anomaly Committee but the higher pay scale claimed by the petitioners was not granted.
Even the Second Pay Commission did not recommend equal pay scales to the Surveyors of these two Departments as the Surveyors of Soil Conservation Department were placed in the pay scale of Rs. 450-880/- whereas those of the Industries Department in the pay scale of Rs. 570-1080/- while the draftsmen were given pay scale of Rs. 570-1080/-.
The petitioners further contend that their last representation of removing anomalies in the pay scale was rejected as is obviously apparent from the letter Annexure P-4 dated 1st November, 1983 of the Deputy Secretary, Finance Department.
The petitioners claim that it is their fundamental right to claim equal pay for equal work on the basis of doctrine enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India read with Article 39(D) of the Constitution.
Reliance in this regard was placed on the observations of the Supreme Court in Randhir Singh v. Union of India, AIR 1982 Supreme Court 879.
The decision of this Court in Jai Dev v. State of Punjab, 1983 Volume I SLR 244 : AIR 1963 (SC) 612 was also referred in this regard.
3.
In the counter affidavit filed by Shri Pritam Singh, Chief Conservator of Soils, Punjab, on behalf of himself and respondents No.
I and 2 it is admitted that petitioners are working as Surveyors in the Soil Conservation Department on regular basis but they have exaggerated their role and responsibilities in the execution of Soil Conservation work.
As a matter of fact, the surveyors are primary field workers for surveying, arrangement of material and supervising the work of this department under the control and guidance of their superiors like Sectional Officers/Agricultural Inspectors/Soil Conservation Inspectors who are better technically qualified than them.
It was also admitted that the duties of the Surveyors in the Soil Conservation and Engineering Department are mainly to attend surveying work, maintenance of work record, extension work of contacting cultivators and to pursue cases with and Mortgage Banks for obtaining loan for execution of work at primary stage with the assistance of guidance of their seniors as mentioned above.
It was further maintained that the duties and responsibilities of the surveyors of Soil Conservation Department have no comparison with the Sectional Officers in the Public Works Department.
Rather the Surveyors are low rank officials than the Sectional Officers under whom they work.
It was, however, admitted that the Surveyors of Industries Department and Land Ceiling (Revenue), Department of Punjab have been given higher pay scales by the Punjab Pay Commission as their previous pay scale was also higher than that of the Surveyors of the Soil Conservation and Engineering Department in view of different nature of duties.
It was clarified that the work of the Surveyors in the Industries Department is more arduous.
The course of Surveyors and Draftsman is of two years duration but it is of three years in case of Sectional Officers.
It was further clarified that Surveyors employed in the Soil Conservation Department and Surveyors in the Industries Department possess the same qualifications i.e. matriculation with two years certificate in Surveyor trade from Industrial Training Institute or any recognised institute but in addition to the said qualification minimum three years experience is required for being recruiting surveyors in the Industries Department.
Considering these factors the Pay Commission categorised the Surveyors of Soil Conservation and Engineering Department lower than the Surveyors in the Industries Department.
In view of these factors the First Pay Commission had recommended the pay scale of Surveyors of the Soil Conservation Department as Rs. 120-250 in the year 1968 but later on the pay scale was revised to Rs. 140-300/- by the Punjab Government on the representation of employees, whereas pay scale of the Surveyors in the Industries Department was Rs. 200-450/-.
It was further clarified that the Second Punjab Commission classified the post of Surveyors in the Soil Conservation Department among the posts of technicians in category IV and that of Surveyor of Industries Department in technician category VI for the purpose of revision of pay scales.
On this recommendation the pay scales of Surveyors of Industries Department were revised from Rs. 200-450/- to Rs. 570-1080/- while that of the Surveyors of Soil Conservation Department from Rs. 140-300/- to Rs. 450-800/-.
It was, however, admitted that the last representation of the petitioner was declined.
4.
The Chief Conservator of Soil Conservation Department also filed additional affidavit dated August 22, 1984 in order to clarify salient features of distinction between the working and professional qualifications of the Surveyors in the Industries Department and Surveyors in the Soil Conservation Department.
In the additional affidavit it was averred that after assessing the comparative work of the technicians, the Second Punjab Pay Commission classified the Surveyors in the Soil Conservation Department in technicians categories IV and Surveyors of the Industries Department in technicians categories VI in view of the variation in their academic and professional qualification, maturity of skill and experience.
In support thereof the extract Annexure A from the report of the Pay Commission 1979-80 as well as letter Annexure B of the Director, Industries Department, depicting the qualification and duties of the Surveyors in the Industries Department were also appended to the return.
It was further highlighted that the job of surveying assigned to the Surveyors of the Industries Department is quite different from the Surveyors in the Soil Conservation Department as the former had to carry out the detailed geological mapping and demarcation of quarries, whereas the latter had to do planning and execution of land development and water management works.
Surveying in the Soil Conservation Department is done with the help of Dumpy Level instrument while in the Industries Department the surveying is carried out with the help of Theodelite instrument.
Apart from the above referred qualifications, the experience of three years required for the Surveyors of the Industries Department vide letter dated 1561984 of the Director, Industries Annexure B was also stressed.
It was also clarified that the job of the Surveyors of the Industries Department is more arduous as they have to work in the hilly areas and live in camp generally from one month to six months period, whereas the Surveyors in the Soil Conservation Department work mostly in plain areas and are not supposed to live in camp months together as the job is generally done in two or three days in the cultivator's fields.
It was also stressed that the Industries Department have only three posts of Surveyors for a specialised job of surveying in their department whereas there are more than 800 posts of Surveyors/Agricultural Inspectors in the Soil Conservation Department.
5.
By way of replication to the additional affidavit Balbir Singh, petitioner also filed an affidavit stating that letter Annexure P.3 dated 1551980 written by the Assistant Director Administration for Director of Industries, Punjab to the Under Secretary, Agriculture, Punjab clearly shows that three years experience in the case of Surveyors of the Industries Department over and above the qualification of matriculation with National Trade Certificate/Diploma in surveying was not treated as basic qualification for recruitment.
It was re-asserted that the job of the Surveyors in the Soil Conservation Department is more arduous as they were also initially given training handling Theodolite instrument and as a matter of fact as per entry at page 15 of the stock register Theodolite instruments have been used by this department and instruments at present are lying in the office of Soil Conservation Department at Ferozepur.
Moreover, the demand for supplying the Theodolite instruments letter P-1 by some officers of the Soil Conservation Department was stressed in order to show that Surveyors Conservation Department perform similar type of duties as Surveyors of Industries Department.
It was further explained that the Surveyors of the Soil Conservation Department had also to stay in camp and to execute the work in hilly areas but their rules do not provide to stay for more than ten days while working in the field.
6.
During the pendency of this writ petition order dated September 30, 1991 in Civil Miscellaneous 6717 of 1991 the petitioners were allowed to place on record copy of Annexure P-9/1, a letter addressed to the Development Commissioner, Punjab by the Chief Soil Conservator, for immediate decision in the matter of Pay Scales of the Surveyors recommended by their department vide their letter No. 2036 dated 29101992.
7.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties beside perusing the record.
8.
The law is well settled on the point that doctrine of equal pay for equal work for both men and women contained in Article 39(D) of the Constitution of India is not enforceable by any Court in view of Article 37 of the Constitution of India as it is contained in Part IV, Directive Principles of the State Policy, but the principles laid down therein are nevertheless fundamental in governance of the country and it shall be the duty of the State to apply these principles in making the laws.
The Apex Court in Supreme Court Employees Welfare Association v. Union of India, AIR Supreme Court 334 (Supra) while disposing of a bunch of writ petitions in para 38 of the judgment observed about the applicability of doctrine of equal pay for equal work as under :-  "It follows from the above decisions that although the doctrine of 'equal Pay for equal work' does not come within Article 14 of the Constitution as an abstract doctrine, but if any classification is made relating to the pay scales and such classification is unreasonable and or if unequal pay is based on no classification then Article 14 will at once be attracted and such classification should be set at naught and equal pay may be directed to be given for equal work.
In other words, where unequal pay has brought about a discrimination within the meaning of Article 14 of the Constitution, it will be a case of 'equal pay for equal work', as envisaged 14 of the Constitution.
If the classification is proper and reasonable and has a nexus to the object sought to be achieved, the doctrine of 'equal pay for equal work will not have any application even though the persons doing the same work are not getting the same pay.
In short, so long as it is not a case of discrimination under Article 14 of the Constitution, the abstract doctrine of equal pay for equal work as envisaged by Article 39(d) of the Constitution has no manner of application, nor is it enforceable in view of Article 37 of the Constitution."
The Court further explained that Dhirendra Chamoli v. State of UP, (1986) 1 SCC 637 is a case of equal pay for equal work was envisaged by Article 14 and not of the abstract doctrine of 'equal pay for equal work'.
9.
In a recent judgment reported as State of Madhya Pradesh v. Pramod Bhartiya, AIR 1993 Supreme Court 286 : 1993(1) S.C.T.
138, the apex Court had enlarged the scope of the doctrine of equal pay for equal work by holding that it is simplicit in the doctrine of equality enshrined in Article 14 of the Constitution of India, while referring to its earlier decision in Randhir Singh's case (supra), as well as its subsequent decisions in para 1 of the judgment, which reads as under :  "Equal pay for equal work, it is self-evident is implicit in the doctrine of equality enshrined in Article 14, it flows from it.
Because clause (d) of Article 39 spoke of "equal pay for equal work for both men and women", it did not cease to be a part of Article 14.
To say that the said rule having been stated as a directive principle of State policy is not enforceable in a Court of Law is to indulge a sophistry.
Parts IV and III of the Constitution are not supposed to be exclusionary of each other.
They are complementary to each other.
The rule is as much a part of Article 14 as it is of clause (1) of Article 16.
Equality of opportunity guaranteed by Article 16(1) necessarily means and involves equal pay for equal work.
It means equally that it is neither a mechanical rule nor does it mean geometrical equality.
The concept of reasonable classification and all other rules evolved with respect to Articles 14 and 16(1) come into play wherever complaint of interaction of this rule falls for consideration.
This principle affirm in Randhir Singh v. Union of India, (1982) 1 SCC 618: (AIR 1982 SC 879) as well as in the subsequent decisions of this Court.
It would be instructive to notice a few of them."
10.
The apex Court also after quoting the ratio in para 38 of its decision by Division Bench in Supreme Court Employees' Welfare Association v. Union of India, AIR 1990 SC 334, in para 5 of the judgment further held as under :  "Though the paragraph opens with the word "the doctrine of equal pay for equal work does not come within Article 14 of the Constitution as an abstract doctrine", the entire paragraph if read as a whole, clearly brings out the fact that the rule is nothing but a fact of Article 14.
Indeed, it may not be possible to say, logically or otherwise that Article 14 does not imply equal pay for equal work.
In view of the matter, we must say that the distinction sought to be drawn in this decision between "equal pay for equal work as envisaged by Article 14" and "the abstract doctrine of equal pay for equal work" is somewhat nebulous and in our respectful opinion appears to be mere semantics."
11.
Thus, there is no dispute regarding the legal proposition that the doctrine of equal pay for equal work does not fall within the ambit of Article 14 of the Constitution as an abstract doctrine but if any classification is made relating to pay scales and such classification is unreasonable and or if unequal pay is based on unreasonable classification, then Article 14 at once will be attracted and such classification should be set at naught and equal pay may be directed to be given for equal work.
12.
The question then arises whether the classification of the Surveyors in the Soil Conservation Department and Surveyors of the Industries Department in the matter of pay scales has reasonable nexus with the object sought to be achieved is arbitrary or discriminatory.
In this regard it is note worthy that basic qualifications required for enrolment as Surveyors in these two different departments as well as the type of duties which they are required to perform would play crucial role in determining whether the parity in pay scales is justifiable keeping in view the difference in nature of duties of the Surveyors of these two departments because the object sought to be achieved by granting better scales to the Surveyors of the one department than that of the other is the competency and efficiency of the Surveyors in performance of different duties.
The petitioners allege that the basic qualifications required for the Surveyors in both these departments are the same as after doing matriculation or its equivalent they have to pass two years certificate course in Industrial Training Institute or other recognised institution.
In the counter affidavit filed by Shri Pritam Singh, Chief Conservator of Soils Conservation, Punjab it is admitted that although the basic qualifications for recruitment to the post of Surveyors in both the departments are the same but three years experience in addition to prescribed qualifications for recruitment as such in the Industries Department is required vide letter Annexure B of the Director of Industries, Punjab, but no such experience is required in case of recruitment to the post of Surveyors in the Soil Conservation Department.
It is further averred by the Chief Conservator that the duties of Surveyors in the Industries Department are of more arduous nature as the Surveyors have to live generally in camps for about one month to six months period because the surveying work of that department is carried out in hilly area, whereas Surveyors in the Soil Conservation Department casually work in the plain areas and are not supposed to live in camps for months.
On the other hand the job of Surveyors in Soil Conservation takes two or three days at Cultivator's fields.
It is further maintained that in the Industries Department there are only three posts of Surveyors for a specialised job of surveying in their department whereas there an more than 800 posts of Surveyors/Agricultural Sub Inspectors in the Soil Conservation Department.
It was further stated that nature of job of surveying assigned to the Surveyors of the Industries Department is quite different from the surveying job of Surveyors in the Soil Conservation Department as Surveyors in the former department carry out survey for detailed geological mapping and demarcation of quarries, whereas the surveying in the Soil Conservation Department is done for planning and execution of land development and water management works.
Surveying in Soil Conservation Department is done with the help of Dumpy Level instrument whereas in the Industries Department the surveying is carried out with the help of Theodolite instrument which is more accurate and sophisticated instrument for surveying besides three or four times more costly and requires sufficient experience in its handling.
13.
Regarding the requirement of experience of three years in the case of recruitment of Surveyors in the Industries Department, the learned counsel for the petitioners contended that the letter Annexure B of the Director, Industries, Punjab depicting the norms and duties of the Surveyors in the Industries Department being based upon the draft rules has no legal binding force.
Reliance in this regard has been placed upon Jitendra Kumar Verma v. The State of Haryana, 1985(1) SLR 41.
In this authority it was held that where rules are already silent on a particular point, the Government can fill up, the gaps and supplement the same by issuing instructions not inconsistent with the rules already framed but the draft rules which are under consideration of the Government cannot be even equated with Administrative instructions.
In the case in hand also under the orders of this Court a copy of draft rules of the Punjab Industries Department (State Services Class-III), 1988 as well as a copy of the draft rules for the Class-III suffering in the Punjab Soil Conservation and Engineering Department have been placed on record by the respondents.
From the draft rules of Industries Department, it appears that for recruitment to the post of Surveyors in the Industries Department basic qualifications required are matriculate with diploma in surveying from a recognised institution or Industrial Training Institute passed with two years experience as surveying, whereas Appendix C to the draft rules of the Soil Conservation Department reveals that the basic qualification for the recruitment of the Surveyors are matriculation or its equivalent from recognised institution and passing of a certificate's course from a recognised institution.
Strangely enough the respondents have not brought on record any Administrative instruction vide which these rules were adopted for the time being.
Even no effort has been made by the respondents to place on the file already existing rules, instructions qua the basil qualifications required for recruitment to the post of surveyors in the Industries Department and Surveyors in the Soil Conservation Department.
In the additional affidavit filed by the Chief Conservator of Soil Conservation Department the reference qua three years experience in addition to the above referred qualifications prescribed for the Surveyors in the Industries Department reliance has been placed on the letter Annexure-B dated 1561984 of the Director of Industries, Punjab.
The operative part of this letter reads as under :  "(1) Qualifications according to Draft Rules  Matric :  Diploma in Surveying from recognised Institute or ITI passed with three years experience.
(2) Duties  To carry out detailed Geological mapping contouring and demarcation of quarries and preparation of plans under the supervision of Geological officers/staff."
This letter having been written in answer to letter dated 1451984 of the Chief Conservator, Soil Punjab clearly shows that the said experience of three years had been depicted on the basis of unrevised draft rules.
As the revised draft rules referred to above upto the year 1980 prescribed only two years experience for recruitment to the post of Surveyors in the Industries Department.
Thus, it cannot be said by any stretch of imagination that there were administrative instructions issued by the State prescribing three years experience on the basis of draft rules which had yet to be enforced by the State Government through administrative instructions.
14.
On the other hand the perusal of Annexure P.3 a letter dated 1551980 written by the Assistant Director on behalf of Director, Industries, Punjab to the under Secretary, Agricultural Development, Punjab clearly shows that the basic qualifications for appointment of Surveyors in the grade of 570-1080/- as recommended by the Pay Commission are matric and diploma or certificate of National Trade in surveying.
The experience of two or three years do not figure in this letter.
Although in so many words there is no direct indication in this letter that the qualification pertain to the Surveyors of Industries Department or other departments but the depicting of basic pay scale before 111978 in this letter as 200-450/- while the recommended pay scale by the then Pay Commission being 570-1080/- clearly spells out that this pertains to the Surveyors in the Industries Department.
If that is so then there is no escape but to hold that the basic qualifications required for appointment to the Surveyors in the Industries Department as well as Surveyors in the Soil Conservation Department are the same.
15.
The basic qualifications or enrolment to posts of Surveyors in both the departments being equal the only controversy which survives in this regard is whether the quality or nature of duties required to be performed by the Surveyors of the Industries Department are more arduous than that of the Surveyors of the Soil Conservation Department.
In this regard it is note worthy that the respondent had not placed on the file any instructions of the State Government prescribing such duties.
In the additional affidavit filed by the Chief Conservator of Soils, Punjab on behalf of the respondents in paras 2, 3 and 4 the distinction between the nature of the job assigned to the Surveyors of these two departments has been highlighted.
These paras read as under:  "2.
Job of Surveying assigned to the Surveyors of the Industries Department is quite different from the Surveying job of Surveyors in Soil Conservation Department Surveyors in the Industries Department carry out survey for detailed geological mapping and demarcation of quarries, whereas the surveying in the Soil Conservation Department is done for planning and execution of land development and water management works.
Surveying in Soil Conservation Department is done with the help of Dumpy level instrument whereas in the Industries Department the surveying is carried out with the help of Theodolite instrument which is more accurate and sophisticated instrument for surveying.
At the same time this instrument is 3 to 4 times more costly and requires sufficient experience for its handling and that is why Surveyor in the Industries Department is initially recruited only if he has got 3 years experience in addition to the qualifications prescribed for the Surveyors.
Qualifications and duties of Surveyors in the Industries Department are mentioned in the Director of Industries, Punjab Letter No. Admn.
3/28/80/5132 dated 15684, attached as Annexure `B'.
3.
Besides, the duties of Surveyors in the Industries Department are of more arduous nature and the Surveyors live in camps generally from 1 month to 6 months period.
Surveying work in Industries Department is mostly carried out in hilly areas whereas the Surveyors in Soil Conservation Department work mostly in plain areas and are not supposed to live in camps for months.
The job is generally done in 2 or 3 days at cultivator's fields.
4.
In Industries Department there are only three posts of Surveyors for a specialised job of Surveying in their department whereas there are more than 800 posts of Surveyors/Agricultural Sub-Inspectors in the Soil Conservation Department.
The Surveyors and Agricultural, Sub-Inspectors Inspectors in Soil Conservation Department do the same job i.e. partly or Surveying and partly of Agriculture extension work in the fields under their jurisdiction."
A bare perusal of the above referred paras of the counter-affidavit reveals that the Surveyors of the Industries Department require more experience to handle sophisticated instrument called Theodolite instrument whereas the Surveyors of Soil Conservation Department do the surveying work with the help of Dumpy Level instrument.
In the replication to the additional affidavit Shri Balbir Singh petitioner has averred that the Surveyors of Soil Conservation Department were also given training in handling the Theodolite instrument and as a matter of fact some Theodolite instruments are lying in the stocks of department of Ferozepur.
Strangely enough the respondent has not controverted this aspect of the matter.
Thus, it cannot be said that the Surveyors of the Industries Department have more experience or technical skill in handling instrument like Theodolite instrument as coinpared to the Surveyors of the Soil Conservation Department.
16.
Regarding the arduous nature of duties of the Surveyors of the Industries Department it is averred in para No. 3 reproduced above of the additional affidavit that they have to live in camps for months together while surveying work in hilly areas whereas the Surveyors of the Soil Conservation Department mostly work in the plains and are not supposed to live in camps for months together as their job is done in 2 or 3 days at cultivators' field.
Admittedly, the Chief Conservation of Soil Conservation Department is not personally acquainted with the duties and working of the Surveyors of the Industries Department whereas the letter Annexure B of the Director, Industries, Punjab written to Chief Conservator, Soils of Punjab dated 1451984 reveals that the duties of the Surveyors of the Industries Department is to carry out a detailed geological mapping demarcation of quarries and preparation of plans under the supervision of geological officers/staff.
Keeping in view that there are only a few tracks of semi hilly areas in the present Punjab State, there is no escape but to conclude that the duties of both the Surveyors are almost the same because the assertion in the counter affidavit that the Surveyors of the Industries Department have to live in camps for number of months is not acceptable.
Simply because there are only three posts in the Industries Department or there are 800 posts in the Soil Conservation Department, it cannot be said that the Surveyors in the Industries Department are doing more specialised job than that of the Surveyors of the Soil Conservation Department.
On the other hand, unrebutted averments of the petitioners that they have to approach the Mortgage Banks also for securing loans to the concerned farmers shows that their duties are more onerous than those of the Industries Department.
17.
In Randhir Singh's case (supra) the apex Court had sounded a note of caution in para 6 of the judgment that the question of equation of posts and equation of pay are matters primarily for the Executive Government and expert bodies like the Pay Commission and not for the Courts, but where all things are equal that is, where all relevant considerations are the same, the persons holding identical posts may not be treated different matter of their pay mere because they belong to different departments.
Of course, if officers of the same rank perform dissimilar function and the powers, duties and responsibilities of the posts held by them vary such officers may not be heard to complain of dissimilar pay merely because the post are of the same rank and the nomenclature is the same.
In that case the parity of pay scales of drivers in the police force and the drivers in other departments was involved.
After elaborate discussion, the classification of drivers of Delhi Police Force vis-a-vis those of other department in the matter of pay scale was held to be irrational.
The respondents were directed to fix the scale of the petitioners at least at par with that of the drivers of the Railway Protection Force with effect from First of January, 1983.
18.
In the case in hand, no doubt the concerned Executive Authorities as well as the First and Second Pay Commission have classified differently the Surveyors of Soil Conservation Department and Surveyors of the Industries Department in the matter of pay scale yet all the same the classification is irrational and discriminatory in view of the above discussion.
The perusal of Annexure A an extract from the report of Second Punjab Pay Commission 1977-79 reveals that the Commission has treated the academic and professional qualifications of Surveyors of these two different departments on the basis of data supplied by the State Government.
As already discussed the State Government has failed to establish on record that there was any Administrative instructions or rules prescribing additional experience as basis qualification for enrolment to the post of Surveyors in the Industries Department.
It appears that the report of the Pay Commission was based on the data supplied by the State Government.
In view of the discussion above, the observations of the apex Court in State of UP and others v. JP Chaurasia, 1989 Volume 5 SLR 788 : AIR 1989 (SC) 19, in the matter of Parity in the Pay scales, on the basis of difference of their duties that the Court should normally accept the determination by Commission or Committee and should not normally interfere with the opinion of expert bodies like Pay Commission, are of no help to the respondent-State as these are not applicable to the facts of the case in hand.
For the foregoing reasons, there is no option but to accept all the writ petitions and direct the respondents to fix the pay scale of the surveyors in the Soil Conservation Department at par with those of the Surveyors of the Industries Department with effect from Ist April 1984 as the earliest Civil Writ Petition 650 of 1984 out of the bunch of these petitions was filed on 921984.
The respondents are further directed to finalise the fixation of pay scales within a period of three months from the receipt of copy of this order.
In the peculiar circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs in all the petitions.
The consequent benefits should be released expeditiously thereafter.