NK Kapoor, J - This is defendant's regular second appeal.
The plaintiff filed a suit for declaration to the effect that the order dated 18.6.197 passed by the General Manager, Punjab Roadways, stopping one annual increment permanently was illegal and void.
The facts leading to the present controversy, are that the plaintiff while working as a driver was accused of consumption of more diesel in Bus No. 3329 and so was charge sheeted and finally leading to the passing of the impugned order.
The impugned order was assailed on the ground (i) that an authority junior to that of an appointing authority has passed the order; (ii) that no proper procedure was followed by the defendant No. 2 and this way the inquiry is wholly vitiated; (iii) that the plaintiff is not at fault for alleged shortage of the diesel as the same could be on account of some defect in the engine etc.  2.
The defendant filed written statement and took preliminary objection that the suit is not maintainable in the present form; that the suit is barred by Payment of Wages Act and that this Court has got no jurisdiction to try the suit.
On merits, it was urged that it is wrong to suggest that authority junior to rank of appointing authority passed the impugned order.
It was further contended that proper opportunity was afforded to the plaintiff before passing the impugned order.
3.
On the pleadings of the parties, following issues were framed :-  1.
Whether the suit is barred by the provisions of Payment of Wages Act ?
OPD.
2.
Whether the suit in the present form is not maintainable ?
OPD.
3.
Whether this Court has no jurisdiction ?
OPD.
4.
Whether the impugned order is bad in law and has been passed by an authority lower in rank than the punishing authority ?
OPD.
5.
Whether the impugned order is bad, illegal and unconstitutional and its effect ?
OPP.
6.
Relief.
The trial Court dismissed the suit, vide order dated 21.1.1978.
4.
Before the appellate Court, the appellant urged that the punishing authority was prejudiced against the plaintiff as he has predetermined the punishment which was to be awarded.
According to the appellant, this was in complete violation of Rule 10 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970, which for facility of reference is hereunder reproduced:  "10.
Procedure for imposing minor penalties :-  (1) Subject to the provision of sub-rule (3) of rule 9, no order imposing on a Government employee any of the penalties specified in clause (i) to (iv) of rule 5 shall be made except after -  (a) informing the government employee in writing of the proposal to take action against him and of the imputations of misconduct or misbehaviour on which it is proposed to be taken and giving him a reasonable opportunity of making such representation as he may wish to make against the proposal;  (b) holding an inquiry in the manner laid down in sub-rule (3) to (23) of rule 8, in every case in which the punishing authority is of the opinion that such inquiry is necessary;  (c) taking the representation, if any, submitted by the Government employee under clause (a) and the record of inquiry, if any, held under clause (b) into consideration;  (d) recording a finding on each imputation of misconduct or misbehaviour; and  (e) consultating the Commission where such consultation is necessary.
(2) The record of the proceedings in such cases shall include -  (i) a copy of the intimation to the Government employee of the proposal to take action against him;  (ii) a copy of the statement of imputation of misconduct or misbehaviour delivered to him;  (iii) his representation, if any,  (iv) the evidence produced during the inquiry;  (v) the advice of the Commission, if any;  (vi) the findings on each imputation of misconduct or misbehaviour; and  (vii) the orders on the case together with reasons thereof."
5.
By referring to the above rule, the counsel urged that the rule envisaged proper opportunity to be afforded to the delinquent employee to make a representation so as to enable him to put forward his own view point before the concerned authority.
In the instant case, the punishing authority did not examine the case with open mind.
The lower appellate Court relying upon rule 10 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970, and the judgments of this Court in cases reported as ML Gera, Sub-Divisional Officer, P.W.D.
v. The Chief Engineer (D) Irrigation Works, Punjab, 1973(1) SLR 1073 and Dr. SS Prabhu v. Haryana Agricultural University Hissar etc., 1974 Cur.LJ 98 came to the conclusion that the impugned order was based upon an illegal show-cause notice and was thus vitiated.
Resultantly, the appellate Court reversed the judgment and decree of the trial Court and thus granted the declaration sought by the plaintiff.
6.
Before me almost identical pleas have been urged which have been duly examined by the lower appellate Court.
As has come on record, the punishing authority had a predetermined mind and so the enquiry is wholly vitiated from its inception.
It is essential that the enquiry officer has an open mind.
In the absence of the same, even the grant of opportunity of such a show cause notice is illusory.
No judgment taking a contrary view to the judgment cited by the lower appellate Court has been brought to my notice.
The appeal is thus devoid of merit and the same is consequently dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.