NK Kapoor, J - This is plaintiffs Regular Second Appeal against Judgment and decree of the Additional District Judge, Gurdaspur, whereby, appeal filed by the defendants against the judgment and decree of the trial Court, was accepted, thereby dismissing the suit of the plaintiff.
2.
Plaintiff filed a suit for declaration to the effect that he is entitled to daily allowance/incidental charges/wages for overtime while performing his duty as Dak Runner from Gurdaspur to Amritsar and back.
As per averments made in the plaint, the plaintiff was appointed as Railway Dak Runner in the year 1952 in the Irrigation Department of Punjab State.
Plaintiffs duty is to carry dak from Gurdaspur to Amritsar and vice versa and for which he leaves the office at about 930 am and returns back with dak at about 8 pm It is the case of the plaintiff that he is performing almost 11 hours duty daily, and so is entitled to claim over time allowance.
It is further contended by the plaintiff that the denial of travelling allowance is illegal, discriminatory and is also violative of principles of equal work and equal pay.
On the failure of the defendants to accede to the request of the plaintiff, hence the suit.
3.
Defendants put in appearance, controverted the various averments made in the plaint.
It was alleged that the plaintiff works only for 9 hours daily.
It was further averred that plaintiff like other employees is being treated equally.
In fact, the duties which are being performed by him are as per terms of his employment.
4.
On the pleadings of the parties, following issues were framed by the trial Court :-  1.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the declaration as prayed for ?
OPP.
2.
Relief.
The trial Court relying upon Rule 249 (i)(ii) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume III, came to the conclusion that the plaintiff is entitled to daily allowance with effect from May, 1984.
Resultantly, suit of the plaintiff was decreed.
Before the Appellate Court, the matter was once again examined on facts as well as law.
Before the Appellate Court, it was urged by the learned counsel for the appellants that the plaintiff has been appointed as Dak Runner in the year 1952 which duty he has been performing during these years without any objection.
The trial court erred in law in relying on Rule 249 of the Civil Services Rules, which specially envisages a declaration by a competent authority before such a Rule is made applicable in a given case.
Since, there is admittedly no declaration by any competent authority that this Rule is now applicable to the employees of UBDC Division Gurdaspur, the impugned judgment of the trial Court, is unsustainable in law.
The lower Appellate Court found merit in the plea of the defendants and so accepted the appeal.
5.
Before me, learned counsel for the appellant has once again urged that the lower Appellate Court has erred in law in overlooking the provisions contained in Rule 249 (i)(ii) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules Vol. III, which is clearly applicable to the facts of the present case.
6.
The relevant position of Rule 249 of the Civil Services Rules, Vol. III reads as under :-  "2.40 When a member of the railway police, or any other Government employee or class of Government employees, whose duties involve constant travelling by railway and to whom a competent authority may declared this rule to be applicable, makes a journey by railway on tour :-  (i) He is entitled either to a free pass under the free pass rules of the railway or to the fares for himself and the employees and luggage accompanying him which a free pass would cover.
(ii) He may draw daily allowance for any day on which he is absent from his headquarters for more than either consecutive hours."
The opening paragraph of this rule envisages that before this provision is attracted, the competent authority is to make a declaration that this rule is applicable in a given case.
Admittedly there is no proof on record that any such declaration has been issued by a competent authority till today.
In the absence of the same, the lower Appellate Court rightly declined the relief sought by the plaintiff.
Even otherwise, this rule could hardly be extended to cover the case of a person whose normal duty is to carry dak from Gurdaspur to Amritsar and back as is clear from his appointment made way back in the year 1952.
The appeal is devoid of merit and consequently, the same is dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.