Harmotinder Kaur Sandhu, J - By this petition Surjit Singh who was a sepoy in the Indian Army has challenged the conviction and sentence awarded to him by Summary Court Martial vide order dated 14111991.
2.
The brief facts of the case are that the petitioner while serving in the Army met with an accident and suffered compound commuted fracture femus lower and also compound commuted fracture tibia, fibula right leg.
He was admitted to Command Hospital at Chandigarh on 2471990 and remained in the hospital till 28111990.
There was no proper treatment in the Command Hospital and in spite of the fact that he remained admitted in the hospital for a long time he was not properly cured.
He requested the hospital authorities to discharge him so that he may get himself treated from private hospital.
He was allowed leave from 29111990 upto 8.12.1990.
The leave was granted because he was unable to resume his duties on account of injuries suffered by him.
Thereafter, he remained admitted in KD Hospital, Mahesh Nagar, Ambala Cantt.
from 15.12.1990 to 25.1.1991 he was operated upon in that hospital on 18121990.
Even after that treatment he was not fully recovered and the Doctor advised him rest at his house and follow up treatment.
While he was under treatment his father visited his Commanding Officer with a letter from Doctor KD Sharma but at that time the unit was at Patti.
Therefore, he met JC.
105354 Sub-Major Gurdev Singh and handed over the letter to him.
Gurdev Singh was explained that the petitioner was getting treatment from Civil Hospital and was unable to resume duty.
He Joined duty on 281991 and on 27101991 he was charged as under :-  "Tentative Charge Sheet  No. 3375138 X Sepoy Surjit Singh, 16th Battalion  The Sikh Regiment is charged with :-  AA Section 39(b)  Without sufficient cause overstaying leave.
In that he, at WC Hospital, Chandigarh having been gtd.
10 days CL from 20 November, 1990 to 08 December, 90 to proceed to his home, failed to report back in the MH Chandigarh on expiry of said leave until he rejoined unit on 02 August, 91 at 1800 hours at his own accord.
Sd/-  (A Nagi)  Col.  Co.  Station : Field  Dated 23 October, 1991."
His plea of guilt was recorded and then some witnesses were examined and he was convicted and sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for six months which was to be carried out by confinement in civil prison.
He was also dismissed from service.
3.
The petitioner alleged that his conviction and sentence were bad in law and were liable to be quashed as he overstayed his leave for sufficient cause being unable to resume his duty.
Although in the Summary Court Marshal it was mentioned that two other officers attended the trial but their signatures were not obtained.
The witnesses were to be sworn at the time of their examination but that was not done and there was no legal evidence on the basis of which he could be convicted and sentenced.
The plea of guilt was wrongly recorded and this fact was also wrongly mentioned that he had nothing to say.
In fact he clearly stated that he remained admitted in the hospital and get treatment from a private Doctor.
There was violation of mandatory provisions of Section 130 of the Army Act as he was not read over the names of the Presiding Officers and other members and he was not asked if he had any objection to be tried by them.
Provisions of Section 143 were also not complied with.
It was the duty of the Court to call Sub-Major Gurdev Singh but this having not been done, the whole proceedings were null and void.
4.
In the reply filed by the respondents preliminary objections were raised to the effect that the petitioner had not filed any appeal against the order as provided under Section 164 of the Army Act.
So the petition is liable to be dismissed on that ground.
The petitioner was convicted by the Summary Court Martial after following the procedure.
Hence the habeas corpus petition was not maintainable.
Habeas corpus petition was maintainable where the person was detained without trial or had been illegally detained but the present petitioner had been convicted am sentenced by a competent court under the Army Act.
On merits it was pleaded that the petitioner while on leave met with an accident and he was admitted in Command Hospital Chandigarh.
He was granted leave from hospital but overstayed leave with effect from 9121990 to 781991 i.e. for 236 days.
He was properly treated in the Command Hospital, Chandigarh and he never requested for change of hospital.
While on leave if he had any problem, he should have reported to the nearest Military Hospital for treatment or to the unit.
By overstaying he committed an offence under Section 39(b) of the Army Act.
This fact was admitted that father of the petitioner me Subedar Major Gurdev Singh but it was maintained that Gurdev Singh advised father of the petitioner to send the petitioner to join the unit.
He was also told that overstaying leave was a sever offence in the army but in spite of the advice given by Gurdev Singh the petitioner did not join duty and remained absent.
It was further contended that there was no violation of any mandatory provisions of the Army Act.
The petitioner confessed his guilt and verdict was given in his presence.
He was also provided with a copy of the Summary Court Martial proceedings and in token of the receipt he signed document Annexure R-1.
He was given an opportunity to produce his defence but he did not lead any evidence.
The order passed by the Court was legal and according to the provisions of law.
The petitioner was awarded punishment after due application of mind.
5.
I have heard Mr. AS Chahal, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. DD Sharma, learned counsel for respondents and have perused the record.
6.
It was argued on behalf of the petitioner that admittedly the petitioner met with an accident as a result of which his right leg was fractured at two places.
He remained under treatment in the Command Hospital, Chandigarh but he was not cured.
He took leave and then got himself admitted in a Private Hospital where he was operated on 18121990.
It was on account of this disability that he failed to resume duty and overstayed leave.
He was not given an opportunity to show sufficient cause for overstaying leave granted to him and moreover mandatory provisions of Section 130 of the Army Act were not complied with.
7.
In support of his contention the learned counsel placed reliance on the case of Ranjit Thakur v. Union of India, AIR 1987 SC 2386 and also on the case of Ex-Naik Kanhiya Lal Pathak v. Union of India, 1988(2) Recent Criminal Reports 371.
In the case of Ranjit Thakur it was held :-  "The proceedings of the Court Martial are vitiated by non-compliance with the mandate of Section 130(1) of the Act in that the Summary Court Martial did not afford to the appellant an opportunity to challenge its constitution as required by that section."
This judgment was relied in the case of Ex-Naik Kanhiya Lal Pathak (supra) and the impugned order convicting the petitioner in that case was set aside.
On the basis of these authorities it was submitted that procedural safeguards as provided under Section 130 of the Army Act were not complied with and the petitioner was not asked if he objected being tried by any officer sitting on the Court.
So the proceedings of the Court Martial were vitiated and thus were liable to be set aside.
It was urged on behalf of the respondents that provisions of Section 130 of the Army Act were not applicable to Summary Court Martial.
These provisions were applicable to only three types of Court Martials i.e. (i) General Court Martial, District Court Martial and Summary-General Court Martial.
The procedure followed in the instant case was of Summary Court Martial which was held by a Court constituted under Section 116 of the Act and the trial was not vitiated for not asking the petitioner whether he objected to being tried by any officer sitting on the Court.
8.
The Summary Court Martial is held only by the Commanding Officer and he alone had to constitute the court as provided by Section 116 of the Act which is as under :-  "Summary Court-Martial :- (1) A summary court martial may be held by the Commanding Officer of any corps, department or detachment of the regular Army and he shall alone constitute the Court.
(2) The proceedings shall be attended throughout by two other persons who shall be officers of junior commissioned officers or one of either and who shall not as such be sworn or affirmed."
9.
According to the provisions of the above referred Section Summary Court Martial is a single member court and the other two persons who are required to attend are not even to be sworn or affirmed.
So far as the question decided by the Apex Court in the case of Ranjit Thakur (supra) that provisions of Section 130 were applicable to Summary Court Martials is concerned those findings are not to be treated as final as a review petition was filed and notice was issued with respect to the findings on a contentions at (a)(i) in the judgment reported as AIR 1987 SC 2386.
In 1988 Supreme Court Cases (Crl.)
915; Union of India v. Ranjit Thakur before a notice was ordered to be issued it was observed that :-  "In the present review petition, it is pi pointed out prima facie with some justification that the Court Martial was a `Summary Court Martial" and not `Summary General Court Martial' and that to the former, the provisions of Section 130 were not attracted."
In view of the above review petition it cannot be said that matter has been finally concluded that proceedings of Summary Court Martial stand vitiated on the simple ground that the petitioner was not asked whether he objected to be tried by any officer sitting on the Court.
In the instant case the proceedings were conducted by Colonel A Nagi, Presiding Officer, 16th Bn.
The Sikh Regt.
and the petitioner never filed any objections before Summary Court Martial, objecting to the pressing of Commanding Officer as Judge of the Court Martial proceedings.
No averments were made to show that he was in any way biased and the petitioner did not get a fair trial.
There is thus no infirmity going to the root of the matter vitiating the proceedings.
10.
It is very well made out from record that the petitioner who had overstayed his leave for 236 days admitted his guilt.
His only contention was that he sent his father with a letter from Civil Doctor who was treating him and his father handed over the letter to one Subedar Major Gurdev Singh.
It was urged that if Subedar Major Gurdev Singh had been examined his statement would have revealed that overstaying of leave by the petitioner was for sufficient cause.
He was under treatment and was unable to move.
This contention of the learned counsel is also not tenable.
It is admitted that father of the petitioner met Gurdev Singh but it is not the case of the petitioner that he applied for extension of leave and sent any application through his father Gurdev Singh informed father of the petitioner that the petitioner should join the Unit and should not overstay his leave.
The petitioner never reported to the nearest Military Hospital nor he sent any intimation to his unit.
Even in his statement before the court he did not disclose the name of the hospital or the Doctor under whose treatment he remained.
He was given sufficient time to produce evidence in his defence but he did not examine the Doctor concerned to show that he remained admitted in the hospital and was unable to move.
Under these circumstances it cannot be said that proper procedure was not followed in conducting Summary Court Martial and the conviction of the petitioner was illegal and in violation of the provisions of the law.
Since the conviction is not illegal, the petition for habeas corpus is not maintainable.
11.
As a result of my above discussion, I find that the petition is devoid of any merit and dismiss the same.
Petition dismissed.