Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - This appeal has been filed by the State of Punjab and Union of India against the judgment and decree passed by the learned Additional District Judge, Patiala.
The claim of the plaintiff/respondent for a declaration to the effect that he was entitled to pension on the basis of "combined service rendered in the State of Bahawalpur and with the defendant-Board and mandatory injunction be granted in his favour directing the defendants No. 1 and 2 to fix pension of the plaintiff by counting his said service has been decreed.
2.
A few facts maybe noticed :-  Plaintiff/respondent, who has since expired joined service in the erstwhile State of Bahawalpur, now in Pakistan way back on April 2, 1922.
On partition of the country, he migrated to Punjab (India) on March 4, 1948.
Thereafter, he served on temporary basis in the Irrigation Department till December 29, 1949.
On December 30, 1949, plaintiff/respondent joined the services of Pepsu Township Development Board, Rajpura, he worked there till April 25, 1958.
His suit for a declaration and mandatory injunction to the effect that the service rendered by him in Bahawalpur State was to be counted and considered for determining his entitled to pension, was dismissed by the trial court on the ground of limitation.
That judgment and decree of The trial court was confirmed by the lower Appellate Court.
The judgment and decree of the learned Appellate Court was set aside by this Court and the matter was remanded to the District Judge for decision on merits.
The claim having been decreed by the lower Appellate Court, the State of Punjab and Union of India, have come up to this Court in the present second appeal.
3.
I have heard Mrs. Charu Tuli, Assistant Advocate General, Punjab learned counsel for the appellants and Mr. Sanjay Dharwal, learned counsel for the plaintiff-respondent Ghansham Dass, whose legal representatives were brought on record vide order, dated March 30, 1993.
4.
Mrs. Charu Tuli has raised only one contention.
She submits that the petitioner was never an employee of the Punjab State or Union of India at the time of retirement.
He was an employee of the Board and as such the learned Appellate Court has erred in passing die decree against the Punjab State.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the plaintiff-respondent submits that the Board was initially constituted in the year 1949 but was later on covered by the provisions of Pepsu Township Development Board Act, 1954.
Thereafter, the Board had passed resolution in the year 1956, duly approved by the Punjab Government on March 4, 1958.
This decision has been produced on record as Ex. P-3.
The learned submits that by virtue of this decision, the Punjab Government was liable to pay pension to the plaintiff-respondent.
5.
A persual of the order dated March 4, 1958, Ex.P-43 shows that originally, employees of the Board were governed by the rules etc. of the Central Government in view of the impending merger of the former State of Pepsu with the erstwhile State of Punjab.
The Board had taken a decision on June 8, 1956 that "the Punjab scales of pay, allowances and other conditions of service should be applied to the Board's employees.
It was further agreed that the emoluments to be drawn by the employees of the Board would be protected."
It was further decided that "Service Rules of the Punjab Government as contained in Punjab Civil Service Rules Vol.
I, II and III etc. will apply to the employees of the Board instead of FR and SR of the Central Government as is being done now."
Approval of the Chairman of the Board was sought with regard to its decision dated March 4, 1958.
The Chief Minister who was the Chairman approved that proposed action.
On a perusal of this document, it is apparent that the Board was initially following the Rules and Regulations of the Central Government.
However, with effect from March 4, 1958, Rules and Regulations of the Punjab Government became applicable to the employees of the Board.
This, however, cannot mean that the employees of the Board ipso facto became employees of the Punjab State.
6.
Nothing has been pointed out to show that there was any decision by the State of Punjab or by the Union of India that the employees of the Board shall be paid pension by the Government.
Further more, learned counsel for the plaintiff-respondent has not been able to point out any evidence to show that the employees of the Board were to be treated as employees of the Government.
The Board is a distinct autonomous body governed by the provisions of the Act of 1954.
The rights and liability of its employees were to be determined in accordance with the Rules applicable to them adopted by the Board.
There was no change of employer.
The Board continued to be the employer of the plaintiff-respondent.
7.
No one has appeared on behalf of the Board.
However, it appears that the liability for the grant of pension, if any, was that of the Board.
In this situation, it appears that the judgment passed by the learned Appellate Court deserves to be modified.
8.
Mr. Sanjay Dharwal, however, submits that in view of the decision of the Central Government in the Ministry of Home Affairs contained in their letter dated, the 25th September, 1958, plaintiff-respondent was entitled to relief given to him by the learned lower appellate Court.
I have perused this decision.
It reads as under :-  From  Shri TS Anantakrishnan,  Under Secretary to the Govt. of India.
To  The President,  Bahalwalpur Govt.
Servants Association,  Pepsu Branch, House No. 2040-42,  New Township, Rajpura.
New Delhi-1, the 25th September, 1958  3 Asvina, 1880  Dear Sir,  I am desired to inform you that it has since been decided, on ex-gratia grounds, that ex-exmployees of the Bahawalpur State, who were in permanent and pensionable service of that State, and who, on migration to India after the 14th August, 1947, secured employment under the Govt. of India, may be granted pension, on retirement from the service of the Government of India, on the same terms as displaced Government servants from Sind and NWFP You are requested to inform the members of your Association accordingly.
A copy of the relevant orders is sent herewith -  Yours faithfully,  Sd/- in English  (T.S.
Anantakrishna) Under Secretary to the Govt. of India."
A perusal of the above decision shows that the former employees of Bahawalpur State, who were in permanent and pensionable service of that State and had secured employment under the Government of India after August 14, 1947, were entitled to grant of pension in the same manner as had been given to displayed Government servants from South and North West Frontier Provinces.
The plaintiff-respondent never joined service under the Central Government.
No evidence has been pointed out to show that he ever became an employee of the Central Government Consequently, he can derive no benefit from this circular.
In view of the above, the appeal is allowed, Judgment and decree passed by the Appellate Court is modified to the extent that the relief claimed by the plaintiff-respondent shall be given to him by the Pepsu Township Development Board (defendant-respondent No. 2) in this appeal and it will not be the liability of the appellants.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.