NK Kapoor, J - This is plaintiffs Regular Second Appeal against the judgment and decree of the Additional District Judge, Patiala, whereby, the appeal filed against the judgment and decree of the trial Court, was accepted thereby dismissing the suit of the plaintiff.
2.
Briefly stated, the case of the plaintiff is that he was appointed as Restorer in 1952 and thereafter, promoted as a Clerk in the Museum Department in 1953.
He was confirmed as a Clerk on November, 1956.
It is thereafter, he was temporarily promoted as Gallery Assistant in November 1967 and thereafter, was confirmed to the post of Gallery Assistant, though without his consent.
It is the case of the plaintiff that the order of his confirmation to the post of Gallery Assistant has been solely made to deprive him from his promotion to the post of Superintendent/Administrative Officer, hence the present suit for declaration that the impugned order dated May 28, 1982, changing the cadre of the plaintiff from Clerical to Technical is illegal and is liable to be set aside.
By way of consequential relief, he prayed that he be treated as an Assistant/Accountant from 1967 and then promoted as Superintendent/Administrative Officer and given all the rights, privilege of seniority, salaries etc. with a further mandatory injunction directing the defendants to grant him all such rights, benefits and privileges as per the declaration sought.
3.
Defendants in the written statement stated that the plaintiff was confirmed as a Clerk in the year 1956.
He was appointed as a Gallery Assistant on the basis of a decree in the Civil Suit and now he has also been confirmed as Gallery Assistant alongwith other officials of the department by virtue of his seniority in the cadre of Gallery Assistant.
The plaintiff has tendered 15 years service of Gallery Assistant.
As regards promotion as Superintendent/Administrative Officer, it was alleged that the plaintiff had claimed for promotion against this post during the execution of decree dated 27101973, but his claim was thrown out.
Thus, he has no claim to the post of Administrative Officer before his appointment as Superintendent.
It was further stated that the post of Superintendent was filled up through direct recruitment.
It Was further stated that the post of Gallery Assistant was in higher grade as compared to the post of Assistant at the time when the plaintiff was promoted as Gallery Assistant.
This way, he had no claim on the post of Assistant/Superintendent.
It was again highlighted in the written statement that it is in pursuance of the decision of the Civil Court that the plaintiff was appointed as Gallery Assistant.
4.
On the pleadings of the parties, following issues were framed by the trial Court :-  1.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the declaration prayed for ?
OPP  2.
Whether the suit is barred by res judicata ?
OPD  3.
Whether the plaintiff has got no cause of action ?
OPD  4.
Whether the suit is time barred ?
OPD  5.
Whether the suit is not properly valued for the purposes of court-fee and jurisdiction ?
OPD  6.
Relief.
The trial court decided Issue No. 1 in favour of the plaintiff and held that the plaintiff has a lien on the post of a Clerk on the ministerial side and has chances of promotion as Assistant Superintendent/Administrative Officer in the line of promotion from the post of Gallery Assistant.
Accordingly, the defendants could not take away the plaintiff's right over his post of Clerk vide Circular dated 2851982.
Issues No. 2, 3 and 5 were decided against the defendants.
Issue No. 4 was decided in favour of the plaintiff.
Resultantly, suit of the plaintiff was decreed as prayed for.
5.
The lower Appellate Court once again examined the matter in all its details.
Counsel for the appellant highlighted that the plaintiff who was temporarily posted as Gallery Assistant in November, 1967, was regularised to the post on February 25, 1970.
It is thereafter, that he was reverted to his substantive post of Clerk.
This action of the department was challenged by the plaintiff by filing a civil suit.
The suit was dismissed by Sub Judge II Class, vide judgment and decree dated January 27, 1973.
Feeling dissatisfied with the judgment and decree of the trial Court, the present plaintiff filed the appeal which was accepted vide judgment of the Additional District Judge, Patiala dated October 27, 1973.
This being the position, the Appellate Court found no merit in the plea of the plaintiff that he still maintains his lien to the post of a Clerk.
Resultantly, the judgment and decree of the trial Court was set aside.
6.
Sole grievance of the appellant is that he having been confirmed as a Clerk in the Museum Department, could not subsequently be confirmed in the cadre of Gallery Assistant and thus, action of the Government in confirming him as Gallery Assistant is per se illegal and hence, unsustainable.
Learned counsel for the appellant farther urged that the Lower Appellate Court has erred in law in construing the oral challenge made by the plaintiff when he was ordered to be reverted from the post of Gallery Assistant to that of a Clerk in the year 1970, amounted to his implied consent and for these reasons, the impugned judgment is liable to be reversed.
7.
There is no denying the fact that the plaintiff filed a suit for declaration to the effect that order dated February 26, 1970 passed by Director, Archaelogy and Museum Department, Punjab, reverting him from the post of Gallery Assistant to the post of a Clerk, is illegal, ultra vires, without jurisdiction and otherwise, opposed to law and rules of natural justice, by means of suit.
8.
This suit was contested by the State.
It was stated that the plaintiff was appointed as a Gallery Assistant vide order dated November 21, 1967, on ad hoc basis for six months and thereafter, had been given extension from time to time.
It so happened that amongst three names sent by the department as desired by Secretary Education for selection to the post of a Gallery Assistant, plaintiff's name figured at No. 1.
But somehow, his name was rejected as he was found unfit for appointment and so, order was passed by the department reverting him to his parent post.
The trial Court after referring to the evidence on record found no merit in the plea of the plaintiff and consequently dismissed the same vide judgment dated January 27, 1993, Yoginder Pal-plaintiff filed an appeal before Additional District Judge, Patiala, who found merit in his submission and consequently accepted the appeal and granted the necessary declaration as sought by him vide judgment dated October 27, 1973 (Exhibit D-4).
Examining in the light of unrebutted evidence Exhibit D-4, there is no escape from the conclusion that plaintiff was regularised to the post of a Gallery Assistant with effect from February 25, 1970.
This way, the order of his confirmation as a Gallery Assistant, cannot be termed as illegal and obviously, on this account, the plaintiff cannot claim to be promoted as of right in the clerical cadre.
As observed by the lower Appellate Court also, it is for the department to consider his claim on compassionate ground, if a case is made out.
9.
No other point has been pressed by the counsel for the parties.
10.
The appeal being without a any merit, is consequently dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.