NK Kapoor, J - This is defendants' Regular Second Appeal against the judgment of the Additional District Judge whereby the appeal filed by the defendants was dismissed.
2.
The plaintiff filed a suit for declaration to the effect that the order No. 116/BEG dated 121984 passed by the Deputy Secretary, Punjab State Electricity Board, Patiala ordering for recovery of Rs. 20013/- from the plaintiff is illegal, void, unauthorised and not binding upon him.
Accordingly, the defendants are not entitled to recover this amount and even the remarks recorded by the defendants are wholly unjustified.
By way of interim relief, the plaintiff prayed for stay of the recovery of the amount of Rs. 20013/-.
3.
The facts of the case are that the Deputy Secretary/Services for Secretary, Punjab State Electricity Board, Patiala, issued a show cause notice dated 2911983 wherein the following allegations are levelled against the plaintiff :-  (1) That he placed following work orders for the supply of display plates of size 12" x 9" x 24 SWG thick MS black sheet painted on one side with detail of particulars with white paint and also border all around the plate to be installed at the premises of industrial tubewell consumers.
Sr No. Work Order No. & Date Oty.
(Nos) Rate Amount 1.
4/46 dt. 12.4.82 1321 14.25 18824-25  2.
5/46 dt. 20482 1388 14.25 19779-00  3.
6/46 dt. 20482 1388 1425 1977900  4.
746 dt. 20482 1186 14.25 16900-50  5.
8/46 dt. 20482 1388 1425 1977950  6671  95061-75  While issuing the said work orders following irregularities have been committed by him :  i) Whereas the instructions of the board issued vide sales circular No. 100/81 were for painting the particulars of industrial/tubewell consumers at their premises, display plates were purchased by him instead.
ii) For procurement, a purchase order for the supply of this item was required to be issued instead of work order as work order is issued only for fabrication of items.
iii) Work order were, therefore, placed to dodge delegation of powers.
iv) Even the work orders were split up to remain within the powers.
v) As per provisions of Sr. No. 59 of the delegation of powers of the rates of work orders are not to exceed the schedule rates or estimated rates, but there was no sanctioned estimate, and in order to dodge delegation of powers he choose to get prepared and sanctioned the estimates after placing the work order.
vi) The purchase has been effected by placing repeat orders which are issued only in emergent cases whereas in the instant case there was no such emergency.
vii) The plates received by him against said work orders were without holds and nuts and bolts for fixing.
Thus in the first instance clear specification was not framed and the material accepted was apparently of poor quality.
viii) He failed to endorse the copy of the said work order to his S.E.
ix) Before issuing the work order(s) he did not ascertain the reasonableness of the cost of this item from market in accordance with the provisions of regulations 6(i)(a)/6(iii)(a) P.S.E.B.
purchase regulations, 1981 read with Sr. No. 59 of Delegation of Powers.
4.
The aforesaid show cause notice was received by the plaintiff at Sunam.
The plaintiff sent reply to the Secretary, PSEB, Patiala, controverting all the allegations referred in the show cause notice.
In defence of his action, the plaintiff contended that the display plates were got prepared in compliance or the spirit of the commercial circular No. 100/81 and to save the funds of the P.S.E.B.
which act with otherwise, benefit the consumer also.
As per case of the plaintiff, no entry was held to nor any opportunity was given to the plaintiff to prove his contention as mentioned in the reply to the show cause notice.
However, the plaintiff received office order dated 121984 whereby recovery was to be effected from him.
The plaintiff termed the order dated 121984 as illegal, void and ultra vires.
In addition thereto, the plaintiff challenged the imposition of penalty as the penalty imposed did not come within the purview of PSEB Employees Punishment and Appeal Regulations, 1971.
The plaintiff further challenged the impugned order of recovery on the ground of discrimination.
The plaintiff averred that Sarv.
Sh. Sarwan Ram and Inderjit Sharma, Executive Engineers of Phagwara and Kapurthala Distribution Division PSEB respectively, though had been found guilty of the identical charge but were merely awarded a minor punishment of censure only.
Even the show cause notice has been issued by the Deputy Secretary/Services for Secretary, PSEB Patiala, which is quite illegal.
5.
The defendants put in appearance, filed written statement and took preliminary objections to the effect that the suit is not maintainable as the same has been filed without the approval of the competent authority.
The Civil Court at Patiala alone his jurisdiction to entertain the suit i.e. to say that the territorial jurisdiction of the Court at Sunam was seriously challenged.
On merits also, the defendants contested various pleas raised by the plaintiff on the conceivable grounds.
On the pleadings of the parties, following issues were framed :-  1.
Whether order No. 116/BEG dated 121984 is illegal, void etc. and is liable to be set aside on the grounds mentioned in paras 3 and 4 of the plaint ?
OPP.
2.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to injunction prayed for ?
OPP.
3.
Whether the suit is not maintainable in the present form ?
OPD.
4.
Whether the Civil Court at Sunam has no jurisdiction to try the suit ?
OPD.
5.
Relief.
6.
The trial Court after carefully examining the evidence led by the parties came to the conclusion that the impugned order dated 121984 is discriminatory in nature and thus void.
The Court specifically noted that like situate persons i.e. Superintending Engineer HS Bains and Executive Engineers Sarwan Ram Chaudhary and Inderjit Sharma have, in fact been let off without imposition of any penalty beyond their censure which on the facts of the present case is nothing but discriminatory.
Accordingly,the trial Court decided issue No. 1 in favour of the plaintiff.
Under issue No. 2 the Court came to the conclusion that since the impugned order is discriminatory in nature and void, the plaintiff is entitled to the relief of injunction as prayed for.
Issue No. 3 was decided against the defendants holding that the suit is not maintainable in the present form.
Under Issue No. 4 it was held that the Civil Court at Sunam had jurisdiction to decide the matter in dispute as show cause notice Exhibit P-1 was communicated to the plaintiff when he was posted at Sunam.
In view of the decision on the above mentioned issues, the suit of the plaintiff was decreed.
7.
Before the appellate Court the counsel for the PSEB made strenuous attempt to justify the passing of the impugned order dated 121984 whereby the plaintiff was ordered to pay a sum of Rs. 20013/- by way of penalty.
The lower appellate Court once again referred to Rule 5 of the PSEB Employees Punishment and Appeal Regulations, 1971, and came to the conclusion that penalties as defined therein do not envisage effecting or taken recovery from any same remain within his powers.
In addition to these, the plaintiff was clearly guilty of flouting the direction of the Board which envisage that such like purchase orders should not be executed without prior approval unless emergent.
8.
Both the Courts have minutely examined the evidence led by the parties in support of their respective contentions.
Both the Courts have held the impugned order to be illegal and the ground of discrimination.
As highlighted by the Courts below, except for the plaintiff other persons in identical positions are let off by merely censuring their conduct.
No plausible explanation has come forward even today as to whom the plaintiff was singled out for imposition of this penatly.
Learned Counsel for the plaintiff has failed to bring to my notice any judgment in support of his contention that such a punishment could be imposed upon the plaintiff as per PSEB Employees Punishment and Appeal Regulations, 1971.
No plausible explanation has been given as to why Sarv.
Sh. Sarwan Ram Chaudhary and Inderjit Sharma, Executive Engineer of Phagwara and Kapurthala respectively, who too had been served with a show cause notice for identical lapse were awarded a minor penalty of censure only.
The act of the Board is per se discriminatory and the impugned order has rightly been held to be illegal by the Courts below.
Accordingly, I find no ground to interfere with the concurrent findings of the Courts below.
The appeal is consequently dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.