DM Dharmadhikari, J - By this petition, South Eastern Coalfield Ltd (hereinafter referred to as 'the employer') has challenged the impugned award dated 3121987 (Annexure-F), passed by the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Jabalpur.
The Labour Court granted relief to one Ganesh Prasad (hereinafter referred to "as the employee"), represented by the Employee Union (respondent No. 1) of setting aside his retirement on superannuation with effect from 5101985 and directions that the dispute raised by him about his date of birth be determined as per rules by the Age Determination Committee.
2.
It is not disputed by the parties that the employer superannuated the employee with effect from 5101982, treating his date of birth as 5101922, whereas the employee has claimed his correct date of birth as 741932.
The Labour Court held that the date of birth 741932 recorded in Form-B, register maintained by the employer under the Mines Act is a mistake and as described by it in its order a 'slip of pen'.
It is also not in dispute that although the employer challenged the award but that part of the award which directed it to refer the dispute of date of birth of the employee to Age Determination Committee so as to afford the employee an opportunity of hearing against the proposed change of date of birth was implemented by it.
It is also not in dispute that in implementation of the above part of the award of the Labour Court, the petitioner was reinstated in service in the year 1988 and thereafter, he continued to serve to the year 1991, till the Age Determination Committee had decided the dispute of his date of birth.
The Age Determination Committee after hearing the employee and after examining the evidence placed before it, came to the conclusion that the date of birth of the employee recorded in the service record as 5101922 was correct.
After the decision of the Age Determination Committee, the petitioner was superannuated again in the year 1991.
3.
Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the employer assailed the impugned award of the Labour Court and submitted that such a vital document as the Gas Testing Certificate issued under the Mines Act (Annexure-A) containing under his thumb impression the entry of date of birth of the employee on 5101922 was over looked.
It was also submitted that the employee had appeared in the Mining Sardar Certificate Examination and as per the Coal Mines Regulations, he could not have appeared in that examination if he was below 21 years of age.
The employee appeared in the Mining Sardar Certificate Examination in the year 1948 and, therefore, it should be presumed that on that date he had already completed 21 years of age.
In the school leaving certificate issued on 3091973 from Middle School, Paharia, Tehsil Janjgir, district Bilaspur, the date of birth of the employee is recorded as 741932.
The contention is that on the face of such overwhelming record concerning the date of birth of the employee, the Labour Court could not have held that entry in Form-B was a slip of pen.
4.
Learned counsel appearing for the employee in reply submitted that the award of the Labour Court having been partially implemented by referring the dispute of age of the employee to the Age Determination Committee, the employee's retirement with effect from 5101982 was rightly held by the Labour Court as bad.
The employee could be retired only after his dispute of age was determined by the committee and, therefore, he could not have been denied the right to serve and wages for the period between the year 1982 when he was wrongly retired and the year 1988 when he was reinstated under the order of the Labour Court.
5.
Having considered the argument advanced by the parties, we are of the opinion that no relief can be granted either to the petitioner employer or the employee represented by the Union, in view of the peculiar facts of the case.
The Labour Court by the award under challenge had set aside the retirement of the employee only on the ground that his case was not considered by the Age Determination Committee after due notice to him.
The employer has implemented that part of the order of the Labour Court and has got the dispute decided by the Age Determination Committee.
In the meantime, pursuant to the award of the Labour Court, the employee was reinstated and he has in fact served for a longer period of five years till his dispute was decided by the Age Determination Committee in the year 1991.
The employee has thus served between the year 1988 when he was actually reinstated and the date in the year 1991 when he was for the second time superannuated.
The employee has thus already been benefited by extended period of service between his actual re- instatement in the year 1988 to 1991 when he was for the second time superannuated wages for this above period, on the basis of the decision of the Age Determination Committee the employee was not in fact entitled.
The employee has already been granted award of wages for the period between 1982 to 1987 and in fact he is entitled to salary for further period up to 1988 when he was actually reinstated pursuant to the award.
The employee has also been paid wages during the period, he was in service.
In our opinion, the employee cannot claim wages for any period in addition to the period stated above.
6.
In view of the discussion aforesaid the petition fails and is hereby dismissed.
In the peculiar circumstances of the case, the parties shall bear their own costs.
The security amount, if deposited, be refunded to the petitioner.
Petition dismissed.