DM Dharmadhikari, J - The petitioners are employees working as Ladle Repair Shop Crane Operators (shortly referred as LRS Crane Operators) in the Blast Furnace Department of the Bhilai Steel Plant under the Steel Authority of India represented in this petition by the respondent No. 3, its Executive Director (hereinafter referred to as the Management).
2.
This petition under Article 227 of the Constitution of India is directed against the order of the Labour Court dated 25880 (Annexure-I) which has been confirmed in appeal by the Industrial Court by its order dated 1471982 (Annexure-J) whereby the strike resorted to by the employees in reducing their working hours from 5 hours 20 Minutes to 4 hours has been declared illegal.
The facts not in dispute are that the employees gave a notice of alleged illegal change effected by the employer vide Annexure-E on grievance stated therein that the working hours of LRS Crane Operators have been increased from four hours to five and half hours contrary to their service conditions.
It is also not in dispute that thereafter they resorted to strike by refusing to work beyond four hours.
3.
The dispute between the parties was taken up in conciliation as is apparent from the order of the conciliator dated 19578 (Annexure-F).
4.
The Management made an application under Section 61 of the MP Industrial Relations Act, 1960 (hereinafter referred to as the Act) to the Labour Court seeking a declaration that the strike of the workmen during conciliation proceedings and in the face of agreement entered into between the representatives of the employees and the Management (Annexure-B) was illegal.
On the basis the application made by the Management the Labour Court as well as the Industrial Court declared the strike as illegal.
5.
Learned counsel appearing for the petitioners assailed the orders of the two courts below on several grounds.
The first contention was that the working hours of LRS Crane Operators were four hours and without a notice of change as required by Section 31 of the Act the working hours could not have been increased to five hours and twenty minutes.
The strike of the employees, therefore, against such illegal change could not have been declared as illegal.
Attention of this court is invited to the provisions of Section 34(b)(i) read with Schedule I Item-10 of the Act.
6.
The next contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners is that the agreement (Annexure-B) on which reliance was placed by the Management was not in relation to working hours of LRS Crane Operators and it was in relation to upgradation and other ancillary matters concerning conditions of service of OBE Crane Operators.
7.
Lastly, it was submitted that the employees had struck work against taking work for additional hours without making additional payment for the same.
Some observations of the Supreme Court in AIR 1984 SC 1473 were read out.
8.
Learned counsel for the respondent/Management supported the orders of the Labour Court and Industrial Court and stated that the strike resorted to by the employees was illegal both on the ground that it was contrary to the agreement entered into between the parties and also because the strike was continued pending conciliation proceedings.
Reliance is placed on Section 80 Clauses (d) and (h) of the Act.
It was also submitted that the Labour Court had accepted the case of the Management that since 1968 the working hours of the employees had been increased from four hours to five hours and twenty minutes when against two cranes three operators were provided.
Before 1968 one crane was operated by two operators.
It was also pointed out that vide para 3 of Annexure-C dated 18774, working hours, as determined by the Industrial Engineering Department, were fixed five hours twenty minutes for three operators on two cranes.
The case of the Management is that the workers demanded reduction of working hours and had given a notice of change.
The matter was then taken up in conciliation and thereafter it was illegal on the part of the workmen to have continued the strike.
9.
Having considered the submissions made by the learned counsel appearing for the parties, we are of the opinion that this petition has no merit and the two orders of the Courts below are liable to be sustained.
10.
It is not in dispute that the employees had given a notice of illegal change.
Thereafter, the matter was taken up in conciliation.
The strike was continued in spite of the pending conciliation proceedings.
The strike thus clearly was illegal and in contravention of the provisions of Section 80(d) of the Act which read as under :  "80.
Illegal strikes and lock-outs  A lock-out or strike shall be illegal if it is commenced or continued :  (d) in cases where conciliation proceedings in regard to the industrial dispute to which the strike or lock-out relates have commenced, before the-completion of such proceedings and during a period of fifteen days thereafter."
11.
We need not go into the other question whether the agreement reached between the parties (Annexure-B) binds the LRS Crane Operators with regard to their working hours because the two impugned orders can be sustained on the provisions of Section 80(d) of the Act quoted above.
The petition, therefore, fails and is hereby dismissed but without any order as to costs.
Security amount, if any, be refunded to the petitioners.
Petition dismissed.