DM Dharmadhikari, J - The order in this petition shall also govern the disposal of Misc.
Petition No. 552 of 1986 (M/s.
Metallurgical and Engineering Consultants (India) Ltd., Bhilai v. The State Industrial Court and two others).
2.
The petitioner claims to be a Government Company engaged exclusively in providing services for consultancy preparation of plans and designs for plants, buildings etc.
According to the petitioner, it is not an engineering industry governed by the provisions of the MP Industrial Relations Act (for short MPIR Act).
3.
The respondent No. 3, RC Muley, is employee in the company as Design Assistant.
The respondent No. 3 was charge-sheeted on 21.2.1979 for alleged misconduct and contravention of Rule 4121 and 4126 of the Conducts Rules and Disciplinary Appeal Rules framed by the Company.
The charges against the respondent No. 3 were under the following two heads :  (1) Engaging in other business/trade or managing/owning a business/trade directly or indirectly whilst in the service of the company without prior permission of the Competent Authority.
(2) Failure to inform the Company regarding management or owning of a commission agency or trade or business by his wife Smt. Shobha Muley.
4.
The statement of allegation was that wife of the respondent No. 3 owned and managed a Readymade Cloth Shop known as 'Calcutta Fashion' situated in Indira Market, Civil Centre, Bhilai, during the year 1972 to 1976 and also owned and managed the shop known as 'Calcutta Fashion Fruit Juice and Ice Cream' at Nandini Road, Bhilai, since 1977.
5.
In Misc.
Petition No. 552/86 (M/s.
Metallurgical and Engineering Consultant (India) Ltd Bhilai v. The State Industrial Court, MP Indore and two others) the charges against the respondent No. 3, Shri PK Naidu, Design Assistant, were that his wife Smt. Vijya Laxmi Naidu had acquired a commission agency of some travel agency.
The respondent No. 3 PK Naidu, was alleged to be found canvassing in support of the said business of his wife.
He was also charged for not having reported the fact of his wife carrying on the business of commission agency to the management of the company/petitioner.
In the connecting petition No. 552/86 the respondent No. 3, PK Naidu, on the basis of domestic enquiry held against him was found guilty of the charges levelled against him and was dismissed from service by order dated 2141981.
6.
In a domestic enquiry held the respondent No. 3, RC Muley, was found guilty and punished by his reversion to the post of Design Assistant, Grade- III and was also further debarred for consideration from promotion for three years, (the order is Annexure-F).
7.
The respondent No. 3 challenged the order of punishment in the Labour Court under the MPIR Act.
The management in reply before the Labour Court supported the proceedings of the domestic enquiry and contended that the service conditions of respondent No. 3 were governed by Discipline and Appeal Rules of the company and not by the Standing Orders of the Bhilai Steel Plant or Model Standing Orders or Standard Orders framed by the Government of MP It was also sought to be contended on behalf of the Management that the petitioner is not an Engineering Industry and, therefore, provisions of the MPIR Act were not applicable and no resort could be made to the State Labour Court.
8.
Learned counsel appearing for the Management invited our attention to the order-sheets of the Labour Court and pointed out that the Labour Court had taken up first the issue of validity of domestic enquiry for trial and on 1511982, since the parties led no evidence on that issue fixed the case for argument on that limited issue.
9.
Learned counsel appearing for the petitioner/company assails impugned order of the Labour Court dated 1491983 (Annexure-H) on the ground that it committed a serious error of procedure in deciding all the issues of law and fact arising in the case against the employer without giving any opportunity to the parties to lead evidence.
The grievance is that the case was listed and heard only on one of the issues framed by the Labour Court on the validity of the domestic enquiry but surprisingly the Labour Court had decided all other legal issues also against the employer.
Learned counsel for the petitioner contends that the issues such as the applicability of the provisions of the MPIR Act to the petitioner/industry, applicability of the Standing Orders or the Service Regulations and the right of the employer to prove misconduct in court were important issues affecting generally the employees of the company.
These issues could not have been decided by the Labour Court without recording the evidence of the parties.
10.
The petitioner challenged the order of the Labour Court in appeal but the Industrial Court also by its impugned order dated 7.11.1985 (Annexure-J) upheld the order of the Labour Court whereby the punishment imposed on respondent No. 3 was set aside and he was directed to be reinstated to his original post with full monetary benefits.
11.
Learned counsel appearing for the respondent No. 3 first made an attempt to demonstrate that both, before the Labour Court and the Industrial Court, the parties by their conduct agreed for decision of all the issues of law and fact arising in the case and never insisted on leading evidence.
The respondent's counsel also submitted that the question of applicability of MPIR Act and of the standing orders, were all pure questions of law and needed no evidence.
The Labour Court and the Industrial Court, therefore, committed no error in holding that the provisions of the MPIR Act were applicable to the employees of the petitioner/company and the conditions of their services were governed by the Standing Orders of the Bhilai Steel Plant.
12.
Learned counsel for the respondent/employee then submitted that remanding the matter to the Labour Court for recording evidence on other issues would be a fruitless exercise only for academic purpose because on the face of it the misconduct for which the respondent No. 3 was punished cannot constitute a misconduct.
It was argued that no service regulation can take away freedom of an employee or his wife to engage himself/herself in any other occupation or trade outside the duty hours because by engagement in its service, the employer cannot turn the employees into a slave for all twenty four hours.
It was pointed out that in this case the trade or occupation was carried on by the wife of the employee which cannot constitute a misconduct.
The order of the Labour Court and the Industrial Court are thus sought to be supported on the ground that disciplinary proceedings and consequent punishment was ab initio void being unconstitutional and absurd.
It was also pointed out that consequent to the order of the Labour Court passed on 14983 (Annexure-H) the petitioner has been reinstated on his original post and now only two years have left for his retirement.
13.
Having considered the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties, we are of the opinion that the petition deserves to partly succeed.
The grievance of the petitioner/company as an employer is legitimate that the Labour Court could not have decided all issues of law and fact arising in the case without permitting the parties to lead evidence on the same.
Learned counsel for the company/petitioner is also right in submitting that such important issues as applicability of the provisions of MPIR Act and of Standing Orders were issues which required investigation also into certain relevant facts as to the nature of trade and industry carried on by the petitioner and the nature of service conditions of its employees.
Such vital questions based on facts and law could not have been incidentally decided without permitting parties to lead evidence on the same while deciding only one of the issues of validity of domestic enquiry.
The adverse findings, therefore, recorded by the Labour Court in its order dated 14983 (Annexure-H) and those in the appellate order of the Industrial Court dated 17111985 (Annexure-J) on the question of applicability of the provisions of MPIR Act and that of Standing Orders are hereby quashed.
14.
So far as the two orders of the two courts holding the domestic enquiry as to valid and setting aside punishment with relief of reinstatement and back wages is concerned, we do not wish to interfere in these proceedings under Article 226 of the Constitution of India with regard to that part of the orders of the two courts below.
The validity of the domestic enquiry was not upheld by the Labour Court as well as the Industrial Court and the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner/company could not successfully assail those findings which have to be upheld, we also do not wish to comment or express any final opinion on the question whether the misconduct alleged against the respondent No. 3 was in fact a misconduct which deserved a disciplinary action.
Since the two courts below have set aside the domestic enquiry as also the punishment imposed and as the respondent No. 3 has few years to serve in the company, we uphold that part of the order both of the Labour Court and the Industrial Court which grants relief or reinstatement with all monetary benefits to the respondent No. 3.
15.
The petition, therefore, only partly succeeds to the extent indicated above.
Under the circumstances, we leave the parties to bear their own costs.
Security amount, if any, be refunded to the petitioner.
Petition partly allowed.