GR Majithia, J - The petitioner has impugned the order contained in letter No. P.O.E/E.A.T.T/92/15755, dated October 13, 1992, issued by the Joint Secretary-cum-Director, Rural Development Department, Haryana, Chandigarh, terminating her services, in this petition under Articles 226/227 of Constitution of India.
2.
The impugned order says that the petitioner was appointed as unskilled casual labourer on daily wage basis in Rural Development Department, Haryana, on June 1, 1990.
She was paid the wages out of the contingency fund of the office.
She was appointed on monthly allowance basis with effect from July 1, 1991.
Since there was no work in the office for which her services could be utilised, it was decided to terminate her services.
One month's notice under Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes, Act, 1947 (as amended by Act No. 1984) was given to her.
3.
In response to the notice of motion issued, written statement has been filed by Sh. RS Aggarwal, IAS, Joint Secretary-cum-Director, Rural Development, Haryana, on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2.
It is stated therein that the petitioner was employed as an unskilled casual worker to work as water carrier for filling water in the coolers during the summer season with effect from June 1, 1990.
She was thus a casual worker and was not recruited or appointed through the Employment Exchange or any other approved source of recruitment.
She was given notice vide memo No. POE (EA-II)-92/15755, dated October 13, 1992 and was also paid pay for the period from November 1, 1992 to November 12, 1992 and was given compensation for one month and seven days as worked out under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for short, the Act).
The petitioner accepted and received the amount of compensation on December 29, 1992.
The receipt is duly signed by her.
Her services were terminated being no longer required.
Since she has not completed five years' service, she could be relieved of her duties.
It is further stated that the action has been taken against the petitioner in the light of the decision rendered by the Supreme Court in Civil Appeal No. 2979 of 1992, State of Haryana and others v. Piara Singh and others, 1992(3) SCT 201 (SC).
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that retrenchment of the petitioner was not justified.
As a result of promotion of a Peon to the post of Clerk, a vacancy of peon has become available against which the petitioner could be accommodated.
In support of his submission, he relied upon Daulat Ram v. The Presiding Officer, Labour Court, UT Chandigarh and another, 1992(4) SLR 206 : 1992(2) SCT 643 (P&H)(DB).
In Daulat Ram's case the petitioner was confirmed on the post of a Peon.
He was retrenched from service after he had been confirmed against that post.
The Union Territory Administration, Chandigarh referred the dispute to the Labour Court.
The Labour Court declined the claim of the petitioner.
The order of the Labour Court was challenged in this Court.
This Court observed that if after retrenchment a post becomes available, the retrenched employee has got a right of re-employment.
The ratio of this judgment has no applicability to the facts of the instant case.
The petitioner was not a confirmed employee of the Rural Development Department.
She was a causal labourer paid out of the contingency fund although on monthly basis.
She was not recruited in service from any regular source of recruitment and as such her services were terminated as there was no work in the office for which she could be gainfully engaged.
5.
The learned counsel then relied upon a Single Bench decision of this Court in Rakesh Kumar Aggarwal v. The Management of M/s.
Milk Plant, Ambala City and another, 1992(2) SLR 290 : 1992(2) SCT 375 (P&H), in support of his submission that the petitioner's services could only be terminated if the procedure laid down under Section 25-F of the Act had been followed.
A reading of the impugned order indicates that the petitioner was given the benefits available under Section 25-F of the Act.
In the written statement it is stated thus :  "That the petitioner was employed as Unskilled Causal Worker to work as water carrier for filling water in the Coolers during the summer season wef.
1690.
She was paid wages out of contingency funds on daily wages/monthly basis.
She was thus a causal worker and she was not recruited or appointed through the Employment Exchange or any other approved source of recruitment.
Considering her to be casual worker, she was accordingly given requisite notice vide Memo No. POE (EA-II)92/15755, dated 13.10.92 as per requirement of Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
The petitioner was accordingly also paid pay for the period from 1.11.92 to 12.11.92 and compensation for one month and seven days as worked out under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 vide Memo No. POE (EA-II)-92/17064, dated 13.11.92.
The petitioner has also accepted and received the said amount of compensation on 29.12.92.
A copy of each of the communications and the receipt for payment as referred to above is annexed as Annexures R.I, RII and RIII has already been annexed as Annexure P-3 by the petitioner.
In view of the fact that the petitioner has already accepted the compensation under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, she has evidently no legal right for invoking extraordinary jurisdiction of this Hon'ble Court under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
The writ petition, therefore, deserves to be dismissed.
That as explained earlier, the petitioner was not recruited through any approved source of recruitment and was only a casual worker.
Her services were dispensed with on payment of requisite compensation, being no longer required.
The Haryana State Govt. vide their letter dated 6490 had issued policy instructions regarding regularisation of ad hoc/workcharged employees and causal/daily wagers etc. and as per these instructions such daily waged employees, who had not completed 5 years of service, could be relieved of their duties, if no longer required.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in Civil Appeal No. 2979 of 1992 and others "State of Haryana and others v. Piara Singh and others" 1992(3) SCT 201 (C) have commended the orders of Govt. of Haryana as contained in the said instructions both relating to work-charged employees as also casual labourers and since in view of the law laid down by Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the said civil appeals, the petitioner has not been recruited or employed through the Employment Exchange or any other approved source of recruitment, she has no legal right to invoke the extraordinary jurisdiction of this Court through the present writ petition which needs to be dismissed straightaway."
These averments in the written statement have not been challenged by the counsel for the petitioner.
The petitioner has been granted the benefits as contemplated by Section 25-F of the Act.
The petitioner's counsel assumed that the provisions of Section 25-F of the Act had not been complied with.
The assumption is untenable in the light of the positive statement that the provisions of Section 25-F were complied with.
The ratio of the judgment in Rakesh Kumar Aggarwal's case (supra) is not applicable to the facts of the instant case.
For the reasons stated above, the writ petition is bereft of any merit and the same is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.