NK Kapoor, J - This judgment shall dispose of Regular Second Appeal No. 2427 of 1991 and Regular Second Appeal No. 2293 of 1991 raising out of the judgment of the District Judge, Karnal, dated 1481991.
2.
The plaintiff who joined the police department in November, 1962 as a constable was promoted in due course as Head Constable and, thereafter as Assistant Sub Inspector till ordered to be dismissed having absented from duty and also remained absent during the period of suspension.
The plaintiff challenged his dismissal order on various grounds including that the punishment awarded is not commensurate with the misconduct allegedly established against him.
Accordingly, the plaintiff prayed that the impugned order of dismissal be declared illegal not in operative against him and the plaintiff be presumed to be still in service.
3.
The suit was strenuously contested by the defendants.
It was urged by the defendants that the suit is not maintainable in the present form and is bad for non-joinder of parties.
In addition thereto, it was urged that the Civil Court at Karnal had no jurisdiction to entertain and try the suit.
On merits, it was urged that the enquiry proceedings were legal and the punishment awarded on account of proved misconduct was quite just in the circumstances of the case.
4.
On the pleadings of the parties, following issues were framed by the trial Court :  1.
Whether the order dated 8.7.1985 passed by the Superintendent of Police Jind by which his services were dismissed and the plaintiff was restrained to any subsistence allowance from 1521985 onward are illegal, mala fide, void ab initio, arbitrary, discriminatory against the Punjab Police Rules and Articles 311(2) of the Constitution of India ?
OPP.
2.
Whether the suit of the plaintiff is not maintainable in the present form ?
OPD.
3.
Whether the suit of the plaintiff is not maintainable for non-joinder of the parties ?
OPD.
4.
Whether this court has got no jurisdiction to entertain the present suit as alleged in P.O No. 3 of the written statement ?
OPD  5.
Relief.
The trial Court after examining the evidence led by the parties came to the conclusion that the order passed by the authorities on the facts of the present case was legal.
Resultantly, the suit of the plaintiff was dismissed.
5.
The lower appellate Court once again examined the case on facts as well as law and came to the conclusion that no fault can be found with the enquiry report.
However, the lower appellate court concurred with the submissions of the learned counsel for the appellant with regard to the imposition of penalty and held the same to be excessive.
The Court came to the conclusion that absence of the plaintiff from the Police Lines, Jind, at best can be termed as case of technical misconduct which could not be construed warranting award of dismissal from service.
Resultantly, the court converted the order of dismissal of service of the appellant/plaintiff to one of compulsory retirement with prospective pensionary benefits.
6.
It is this order of the lower appellate Court which has been assailed by the plaintiff as well as the State of Haryana in these two appeals.
7.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the various documents referred to during the arguments.
The sole charge levelled against the plaintiff is that while posted at Police Lines, Jind, he was assigned duty to look after the Chief Minister, Haryana, on 621985 but he did not report back and so was placed under suspension on 721985.
It is further the case of the defendants that on 1121985 he proceeded on leave and was to report back on 1521985 but he did not turn back and in this way absented himself from duty.
There is no denying the fact that the plaintiff absented from no just reason and so did not report for duty assigned to him to look after the Chief Minister, Haryana.
Similarly, he did not report back after the expiry of leave period.
All the same, the punishment of dismissal is too harsh in the circumstances of the case.
The plaintiff had rendered fairly long service in the department, say since 1962.
Thus, the Court below rightly substituted the penalty of compulsory retirement with prospective pensionary benefits instead of dismissal of service.
The apex Court in case reported as Ashok Kumar v. Union of India, 1988(2) SLR 209, also chose to substitute lesser punishment in the given case.
I find the judgment of the District Judge perfectly just in the circumstances of the case.
Resultantly, the same does not call for interference.
No other point arise in this second appeal.
Accordingly, both these appeals are dismissed.
Appeals dismissed.