RS Mongia, J (Oral) - On the recommendation of Employment Exchanges, Rohtak and Jajjar, petitioner-Kailash Chander alongwith S/Shri Om Parkash, Devinder Singh and Ved Parkash were appointed as Malis (Class IV) in the time scale of Rs. 300-430/- plus usual allowances.
The appointment order was issued on 3131982 by the Deputy Director of Agriculture, Rohtak, copy of which has been attached as Annexure P/1.
The terms of appointments mentioned in the appointment letter Annexure P/1 may be noticed :-  (i) His services are liable to be terminated at any time without any notice or assigning any reasons thereof.
(ii) The post is purely temporary.
(iii) Before joining duty he will be required to produce the following documents -  (1) Medical Certificate of fitness for first entry into Govt. Service together with satisfactory evidence of having been vaccinated or revaccinated during the last three months.
(2) Certificate to the effect that he has only one living wife.
(3) Certificate of proof of the date of birth.
His appointment is further subject to the conditions that his character and antecedents are verified and found satisfactory by the District Magistrate concerned."
2.
The petitioner joined the post of Mali on 841982.
However, his services were terminated w.e.f.
141985.
The petitioner raised an industrial dispute against the termination of his services on the ground that the termination was wholly illegal being violative of section 25-F(G) & (H) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
The Labour Court to whom the matter was referred for adjudication decided the case against the petitioner vide its Award dated 971990, copy of which has been attached as Annexure P/8 to the writ petition.
This led the petitioner to file the present writ petition.
3.
Before the Labour Court, the case put forth on behalf of the respondents was that the petitioner had been employed under a particular scheme known as Desert Development Project Scheme (in short D.D.P.)
and on the termination of the scheme w.e.f.
3131985, petitioner's services were terminated.
It was also pleaded on behalf of the respondents that the Department of Agricultural where the petitioner was employed as a Mali was not an 'industry' and, therefore, the question of applicability of the Industrial Disputes Act did not arise.
4.
The Labour Court found that it had been proved on the record that the termination of the petitioner's services was against the mandatory provisions of Section 25-F of the Act.
However, it held the respondent-Department not to be an 'industry' and consequently decided the case against the petitioner.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that in the earlier award given by the same Labour Court i.e. Labour Court Rohtak in three cases of S/Shri Ram Chander Mali Jai Singh, Chowkidar and Om Parkash Mali, it had been held that respondent-Department is an industry.
He has attached copies of the Award dated 16101986, 20.10.1986 and 29101986 as Annexures P/4, P/5 and P/6 respectively with this writ petition.
He has further argued that Om Parkash in whose favour the Labour Court gave its Award (Annexure P/6) he also been appointed alongwith the petitioner vide Annexure P/1 and there was no reason why the Labour Court to take a different view of the case of the petitioners to the effect that the respondent-Department was not an industry.
He further submitted that service of Devinder Singh, Mali who has also appeared alongwith the petitioner vide Annexure P/1, were also terminated on the same day when the petitioner's services were terminated.
The Labour Court in the case of Devinder Singh, Mali, vide Award dated 6.7.1990 had held the respondent Department not to be an industry.
The said Devinder Singh filed a writ petition in this Court being C.W.P.
No. 280 of 1991 challenging the Award of the Labour Court.
He said writ petition was allowed by this Court on 12111991 holding that respondent-Department is an industry.
Learned Single Judge while deciding C.W.P.
No. 280 of 1991 noticed the fact that the Department itself had implemented the Labour Court Award in favour Ram Chander, Jai Singh and Om Parkash (Annexures P/4, P15 & P/6) in which it was held that the Department in an industry.
Learned Single Judge also independently relying on Supreme Court judgment in Bangalore Water Supply & Sewerage Board v. A Rajappa and others, AIR 1978 SC 548 held the respondent-Department to be an industry, Learned counsel went on to submit that the only ground for non-suiting the petitioner by the Labour Court was that according to it the respondet-Department is not an industry.
According to the learned counsel, once the respondent-Department had been held to be an industry by the Labour Court itself in some other cases and also by this Court in Devinder Singh's case (supra), there was no reason as to why the petitioner should be denied the relief.
5.
The learned counsel for the respondents could not successfully counter the argument of the petitioners counsel in view of the judgment of this Court in Devinder Singh's case (supra).
6.
Following the judgment in C.W.P.
No. 280 of 1991, it is held that the respondent-Department is an industry and to that extent the finding of the Labour Court is reversed.
It is not disputed and rather a finding has been recorded by the Labour Court that there has been violation of Section 25F of the Industrial Disputes Act.
7.
For the forgoing reasons, this writ petition is allowed and Award dated 971990 (Annexure P/8) is hereby set aside.
The petitioner is entitled to be reinstated with continuity of service.
8.
The petitioner is present in Court and I have ascertained from him as to what he was doing during the interregnum period after the termination of his services.
He is an able-bodied man and it cannot be imagined that he has not earned anything during the interregnum period.
Taking into consideration the fact that the services of the petitioner were terminated in the year 1985 and he is an able-bodied man, who just have earned during the interregnum period, I hold that he would be entitled only to half the back wages.
Let the petitioner be reinstated forthwith and the arrears of wages, as observed above, be paid to him within a period of three months from the date of receipt of copy of this order.
I make no order as to costs.