Harjit Singh Bedi, J - By this judgment we propose to dispose of LPA Nos. 1245 and 1340 of 1991, 12 of 1992, CWP Nos. 18230 of 1991 and 709, 8563, 8571, 8572/1992, 6236/1991 7102, 7160 and 8853 of 1992.
The facts of the case have been taken from LPA No. 1245 of 1991.
2.
The appellants, who were respondents in the writ petitions, are aggrieved by the order of the learned single Judge dated 24th September, 1991 allowing the writ petition and quashing the notification/orders Annexures P-2 and P-3 to the writ petition in so far as the same make a distinction between regular and ad hoc doctors in the service of the State of the purpose of eligibility selection to the Post Graduate Degree and Diploma Courses and issuing a direction to the respondents to treat both the classes equally for admission to the said courses as in-service candidates.
3.
The petitioners in the writ petitions who are respondents in this appeal passed their MBBS Examination from the State Medical Colleges in Punjab between the years 1983 and 1985.
After having completed the required tenure of internship as also house jobs, they were appointed to the service of the Punjab Government ad hoc employees and on the date of the filing of the writ petitions were holding the same status.
The State of Punjab issued a Notification dated 23rd November, 1990 (Annexure P-1 to the writ petition) proposing selection of students for admission to the Three-Years Post Graduate Degree Course for the session 1991-92 in the Government Medical Colleges at Patiala and Amritsar to be made on the basis of a Post Graduate Entrance Test which was to be conducted by the Guru Nanak Dev University Amritsar on 27th February, 1991.
The terms of eligibility for appearing in the test were spelt out in the aforesaid Notifications.
As per these terms, all in-service PCMS Class-II doctors and fresh candidates were eligible to take the test and reservation for the in-service candidates was made to the extent of 60 per cent whereas in-service candidates as also fresh graduate candidates were made eligible to compete for the other 40 per cent of seats; the number of seats to be determined after leaving out 25 per cent seats for the All India quota.
It was also provided that in-service candidates were required to have five years regular service of which at least three years were to be in a rural areas.
This provision was modified by the corrigendum dated 29th January, 1991 appended as Annexure P-3 to the writ petition and reproduced here under :  "Eligibility of candidates will be determined by in accordance with orders issued vide Punjab Government No. 7(2) 5120-III-89/27960 dated 10th November, 1989, whereby three years of rural service (including ad hoc service continuous with regular service) is essential."
The petitioners believing themselves to be eligible for selection as in-service candidates, applied for the course in question and obtained the following positions in order of merit.
Sr.No.
Name of the Petitioner Marks obtained Merits in-service Merit general 1.
Dr. Bhushan Lal 468 3 32 2.
Dr. Lalit Kumar 459 4 37 3.
Dr. Sanjay Kapoor 416 11 103 4.
Dr. Anil Kumar 391 19 146 It is, however, stated that at the time of interview they learnt for the first time that they were not being considered under the 60 per cent quota meant for in-service candidates and were required to take their chance in quota of 40 per cent for the open category instead on the ground that as they were not regular employees of the Punjab Government they could not be treated as in-service candidates.
Aggrieved thereby, the petitioners challenged this action of the State Government in this writ.
The learned single Judge found that all the petitioners had rendered more than three years of rural service and were fully eligible to be considered as in-service candidates as no distinction could be drawn between ad hoc employees and those appointed on a regular basis as the nature of duties performed by both were similar.
It was also held that the selection of the regular employees through the Punjab Public Service Commission and that of the ad hoc employees through a Departmental Selection Committee would not give any benefit to the former as once an entrance test has been held for admission to the Post Graduate Classes as in the present case all employees were liable to be treated equally.
An additional argument that weighed with the learned single Judge was that as per the recommendations of the Sandhawalia Committee, the services of the petitioners were likely to be regularised shortly and they were entitled to be treated as in-service candidates.
As already mentioned above, aggrieved by the order of the learned Single Judge the present LPA has been filed and while the appeal was pending the civil writ petitions, noted above, have also been filed seeking admission to the Post Graduate Course for the year 1992.
4.
The primary argument made by the learned counsel for the appellant was that ad hoc and regular employees were not entitled to be treated as equals as the very nature of the appointment of the two precluded this possibility.
It was also argued by Mr. Saron, learned Deputy Advocate-General, appearing in the connected appeals, on the strength of the judgments reported as Dr. Suresh Sharma and others v. State of Punjab and others, 1986(2) SLR 205 and Aditya Kumar Agarwal and others v. The State of Punjab and others, 1986(4) SLR 582 that the distinction between in-service candidates and fresh graduates had been accepted by this court and, as such, the further distinction made between regular and ad hoc appointees was well merited and made after due consideration.
He has also relied on a decision of the Full Bench of this Court reported as SK Verma and others v. State of Punjab and others, AIR 1979 Punjab and Haryana 149, the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the Direct Recruit Class-II Engineering Officers' Association and others v. State of Maharashtra and others, AIR 1990 SC 1607 and another Division Bench decision of this Court in Dr. JS Gill and others v. The State of Punjab and another, 1992(3) Recent Services Judgments 81 that an ad hoc appointment was made purely as a stop-gap arrangement to meet a particular exigency or situation and, as such an ad hoc appointee could not be equated with a regular one.
5.
Mr. Deepak Sibal, who appeared in some of the connected writ, petitions, seeking admission to the course on the basis of the judgment of the learned single Judge for the year 1992 and Mr. PS Patwalia, learned counsel appearing for the private-respodents in the appeals, however, sought to support the judgment of the learned single Judge by contending that the basic requirement for selection was three years' rural service and this had been time and again reiterated by the State of Punjab in the course of its pleadings filed in various cases in this court and including Dr. Suresh Sharma's and Aditya Kumar Agarwal's cases (supra).
On this basis it has been emphasised that there was no logic in making a distinction between ad hoc and regular employees ad hoc employees also had the requisite number of years in service as also the experience required and were thus liable to be treated equally for admission to the Post Graduate Classes.
Emphasis was also laid on a decision of the Supreme Court in Deepak Sibal v. Punjab University and another, AIR 1989 SC 903 that the meaning of the word 'regular' meant 'bona fide' and the ad hoc doctors who were admittedly employees of the State Government could not, therefore, be treated adversely.
It has also been urged by Mr. Sibal that the services of all the petitioners in the writ petitions filed by him had vide notification dated 4th February, 1993, been regularaised with effect from 26th June, 1992 and as such, were entitled to be treated as regularly appointed doctors and accordingly to be considered as in-service candidates in the admissions made in the year 1992.
6.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length and have one through the pleadings of the parties as also the judgments cited at the Bar.
The fate of the appeals will undoubtedly hinge on the status of ad hoc or temporary employees vis-a-vis regular ones.
This matter is not res integra and has been dealt with in the judgments in SK Verma's Direct Recruit Class-II Engineering Officer's Association and Dr. JS Gill's cases (supra).
In the first cited case, the Full Bench of this Court while construing the status of an ad hoc or a temporary employee held as under :-  "We do not propose to get enmeshed in any abstruse discussion about the precise legal connotation of the term 'ad hoc employees' or to attempt a precise definition thereof.
Indeed, it appears to us that this convenient appellation for a wholly temporary employee cannot be raised to the pedestal of a term of art.  x x x x x  To our mind, the term 'ad hoc employee' is conveniently veniently used for a wholly temporary employee engaged either for a particular period or for a particular period or for a particular period or for a particular purpose and one whose services can be terminated with the maximum of ease.
The dictionary meaning of ad hoc in Webster's New International Dictionary has been given as 'pertaining to, or for the sake of this case alone.
In the Random House Dictionary its meaning has been given as for this special purpose with respect to this object or thing."
Therefore, having regard to the ordinary meaning of the term, no distinction can reasonably be drawn between a temporary employee whose services are terminable without notice or otherwise and an employee characterised as ad hoc and employed on similar terms.
Indeed, it appears to us that in the gamut of service law an ad hoc employee virtually stands at the lowest rung.
As against the permanent, quasi permanent and temporary employee, the ad hoc one appears at the lowest level implying that he had been engaged casually, or for a stop-gap arrangement for a short duration or fleeting purposes."
In Direct Recruit Class II Engineering Officer's Association's case (supra) the question posed was as to whether the period of officiation followed by a regular appointment could be counted towards seniority in the service.
While disposing of this question, the Hon'ble Supreme Court considered the import and meaning of an officiating or an ad hoc appointment and observed thus :  "If an appointment is made by way of stop-gap arrangement, without considering the claims of all the eligible available persons and without following the rules of appointment, the experience on such appointment cannot be equated with the experience of a regular appointee, because of the qualitative difference in the appointment.
To equate the two would be to treat two unequals as equal which would violate the equality clause."
In Dr. JS Gill's case (supra) after considering the above cited case, the Division Bench had this to say :  "We are, however, of the opinion that since the ad hoc doctors are treated as regular only after their appointment is approved and they are duly recommended by the Service Commission, those who are to be regularised from a distinct class and that such distinction is well founded and quite reasonable."
It will, thus, be seen that the status conferred on an ad hoc or a temporary employee is a tenuous one and no benefit can flow from service of such a nature.
We are, therefore, of the view that the learned single Judge was in error in conferring equal status on ad hoc and regular employees.
Deepak Sibal's case (supra) too does not help the case of the respondents.
The matter in controversy therein was as to whether admission to evening classes for the LLB Courses could be confined only to employees of Government, Semi-Government and similar bodies to the complete exclusion of those working with private employers.
The Supreme Court held that this concession was liable to be made available to all 'bona fide' employees irrespective of the status of the employer.
It was nowhere held, as has been suggested by Mr. Sibbal, that all bona fide employees, ad hoc or otherwise were to be treated equally for all purposes.
7.
Mr. Sibal next argument that the only criteria that should have formed the basis for determining the eligibility of in-service candidate was three years rural service and for this purpose he has relied on Dr. Suresh Kumar's and Aditya Kumar Agarwal's case (supra).
We are unable to keep this contention as well in the light of the observations made above.
It is to be noted that the Government itself has made a clear distinction between ad hoc and regular doctors in as much as doctors working on regular basis were called upon to execute bonds binding them to serve the State after completing the course, whereas no such stipulation has been made in favour of the ad hoc doctors.
Moreover, the doctors working on a regular basis were entitled to the grant of study leave and ipso facto to receive full pay for the period of their study.
In reply to this argument, Mr. Sibal stressed that his clients were also willing to execute indemnity bonds in the same way as regular doctors and this matter, if at all, should not stand in their way.
We find ourselves unable to agree.
It is to be noted that the links of an ad hoc or temporary employee with the employer is, to say the least, very brittle and liable to be snapped with the slightest of effort on either side, whereas in the case of a regular employee the employer would retain control and make him amenable to the discipline of the department.
Moreover, it is not for this Court to adjudicate on the validity of a policy for admission to educational institutions framed by the State Government unless such policy is wholly arbitrary and irrational.
The Supreme Court in Sandeep Brar and another v, State of Punjab and others, 1993(1) RSJ 323 has held as under :  "We are of the view that these appeals are to be allowed on the short ground that the methodology for admission to the reserve seats for sportsmen/sportswomen is the function of the State and has to be decided by the State Government.
It is the function of the executive to lay down the procedure for admission to the reserve categories.
It is no doubt correct that this Court has the power of judicial review and if the validity of the Government instructions is challenged this court can examine the same."
As already indicated above, we find that the policy of the State government in confining the benefit of admission in the category of in-service candidates to only such doctors who were working on regular basis is fully justified and does not suffer from any Act of arbitrariness so as to warrant interference by this Court.
8.
The final argument of Mr. Sibal is also to no avail.
It is true that though the services of the petitioners appear to have been regularised with effect from 26th June, 1992 vide notification dated 4th February, 1993, yet what is to be seen is as to whether the said doctors were actually in regular employment on the date when the application forms were submitted.
Admittedly, that was not the case.
Merely because the State Government has chosen to regularise the services of the ad hoc doctors with retrospective effect, it would not give the petitioners any right to be treated as eligible for admission to the Post Graduate course also with retrospective effect.
To hold otherwise, would be to create chaos and confusion in the admissions already made and to make the system of admission unworkable.
9.
Having held as above, the question now arises as to the nature of the relief that has to be made available to the various parties to the litigation.
The respondents in the appeals were admitted to the post graduate courses in the admission made in the year 1991 and they thereafter, secured a favourable order from the learned single Judge which has been impugned in the present appeals.
It is, therefore, apparent that they have undergone almost two years of the three years course and to disturb them at this stage would be most improper.
As far as these respondents are concerned, we find that they must be allowed to continue and complete their course.
Additionally, it has been argued by Mr. Patwalia that the services of the respondents have since been regularised and thy are now entitled to be treated as regular in-service doctors.
C.W.P.
No. 18230 of 1991 has been filed by a doctor who was working on a regular basis impugning the correctness of the judgment of the learned single Judge.
This petition is to be allowed.
We accordingly direct that the petitioner in this case would be entitled to admission to the post graduate classes as a matter of right for the session commencing from 1993.
For the reasons recorded above, the appeals are allowed; the judgment of the learned single Judge is set aside and the writ it petitions other than CWP No. 18230 of 1991 dismissed subject to the observations made above.
There will be no order as to costs.
Appeals allowed.