KP Bhandari, J - I allowed this appeal and decreed the suit of the plaintiff-appellant with no order as to costs vide judgment dated 4111992.
In the said order I had said that detailed reasons to follow.
Now, I proceed to give reasons in support of the judgment.
2.
The plaintiff-appellant was working as Superintendent Grade III and was reverted to the post of Assistant without giving him any opportunity of being heard or holding any enquiry as envisaged by Article 311 of the Constitution.
Five annual grade increments of the appellant have also been stopped.
The appellant filed an appeal against the order stopping increments.
The appeal was dismissed without keeping in view the provisions of Rule 19 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970.
3.
The appellant filed a civil suit challenging the order of reversion passed against the appellant reverting him from the post of Superintendent Grade III to the post of Assistant, He also challenged the order imposing punishment of stoppage of five increments as well as the appellate order.
The main challenge is on the ground that during the enquiry the petitioner made an application to the Enquiry Officer that he has apprehension that he will not get justice from him and requested that enquiry proceedings should be transferred.
The enquiry officer did not decide the application.
No orders on the application were conveyed to the appellant by the Enquiry Officer nor did he forward the application to the punishing authority for consideration whether the enquiry proceedings should be transferred or not.
The appellant wanted the decision on the application but the enquiry officer proceeded ex parte and recommended that the charges levelled against the appellant have been proved.
There upon five annual grade increments were stopped.
He also filed an appeal against this order.
The appeal was also dismissed.
The order passes on the appeal was very brief and was non-speaking.
The requirements of Rule 19 of the Rules were not complied with.
The Subordinate Judge partly decreed the suit of the plaintiff.
4.
Aggrieved against the judgment of the subordinate Judge, the State preferred an appeal to the court of Additional District Judge, Chandigarh.
The Additional District Judge, accepted the appeal and set aside the judgment and decree passed in favour of the appellant and dismissed the suit of the plaintiff.
5.
Aggrieved against the judgment and decree passed by the Additional District Judge, the appellant has come up in appeal to this Court.
It has been strongly contended by the counsel for the appellant that appellant has been reverted from the post of Superintendent Grade III to the post of Assistant by way of punishment.
My attention has been drawn to para 11 of the written statement filed by the State before the Subordinate Judge which is at page 33-34 of the trial Court file.
A reference to the written statement shows that the appellant has been reverted from the post of Superintendent Grade III to that of Assistant on the ground of mis-conduct and also on the ground that he has absented from duty.
It is specifically averred in the written statement that the order of reversion has been passed on account of his indiscipline, in subordination and wilful absence from duty.
The admission of a party is the best evidence.
Now, it is admitted case that appellant has been reverted from the post of Superintendent Grade III to that of Assistant on the ground of mis-conduct.
The mis-conduct alleged is indiscipline, in subordination and wilful absence from duty.
The very foundation of the order is the alleged mis-conduct levelled against the appellant.
So, on the face of it action has been taken by way of punishment.
Reversion from the post of Superintendent Grade III to that of Assistant amounts to punishment within the meaning of Article 311(2) of the Constitution.
The appellant could not be reverted without holding the enquiry as laid down in Article 311(2) of the Constitution.
It is not denied by the State counsel that no enquiry was held before reverting the petitioner from the post of Superintendent Grade III to that of Assistant.
Counsel for the appellant has drawn my attention to the decision of the Supreme Court reported in State of UP v. Sugar Singh, AIR 1974 SC 423.
In this case, the government servant was reverted from officiating position on the basis of adverse reports.
This was admitted by the standing counsel for the government at the hearing of the case.
The Supreme Court held that once it is admitted that the reversion is on the ground of mis-conduct then the provisions of Article 311(2) of the Constitution will have to be complied with.
6.
Counsel for the State submitted that the petitioner was a probationer.
He could be reverted at any time during the period of probation.
Reliance is placed on the decision of the Supreme Court reported in Parshotam Lal Dhingra v. Union of India, AIR 1958 SC 36.
It is true that a probationer can be reverted from the higher post if during the period of probation his work is not satisfactory.
But if the foundation of the order of reversion is mis-conduct and the authorities wanted to punish him for that reason and revert the government servant without following the procedure laid down in Article 311(2) of the Constitution then the order of reversion cannot be justified merely on the ground that the government servant is probationer.
Article 311 applies to all government servants whether they are holding permanent post or temporary or officiating or are probationers.
The provisions of Article 311 are attracted only when action is by way of punishment.
The Supreme Court has laid down in Shamsher Singh v. State of Punjab, AIR 1974 SC 2192 that while determining whether the services of probationer have been terminated simplicitor or by way of punishment, the Court must see the substance of the matter and the Court cannot simply go by the form of the order.
If the foundation of the order shows that the authorities wanted to punish him for his mis-conduct then the provisions of Article 311(2) of the Constitution will have to be complied with.
In Shamsher Singh's case (supra) he was a probationer serving in the Punjab Judicial Service.
During the period of probation his services were terminated on the allegation of mis-conduct.
The order of reversion was silent but the Supreme Court came to the conclusion that the foundation of the order shows that the authorities wanted to punish him for the alleged mis-conduct.
The Constitution Bench of 7 Judges allowed the writ petition and set aside the impugned order or reversion.
In my opinion, in the present case, after going through para 7 of the written statement of the State, it is admitted case that the petitioner has been reverted on the ground of indiscipline, insubordination and wilful absence from duty.
As the provision of Article 311(2) of the Constitution were not complied with before reverting him, the order of reversion is liable to set aside being violative of Article 311(2) of the Constitution.
7.
In view of the above discussion, I hold that the order reverting the appellant from the post of Superintendent Grade III to that of Assistant is illegal, ultra vires, null and void and unconstitutional and the appellant continues to be in the service of respondent as Superintendent Grade III and is also entitled to all consequential benefits.
8.
Counsel for the appellant next contended that before awarding punishment of stoppage of five increments no proper enquiry was held.
An application was submitted by the appellant before the Enquiry Officer that he does not hope that justice will be done to him and requested that enquiry proceedings should be transferred to some other officer.
The Enquiry Officer did not forward the application for the consideration of the appointing authority.
He also did not take any decision on the application.
The Enquiry Officer proceeded ex-parte.
On the bases of the ex-parte report, the punishing authority awarded punishment of stoppage of five increments.
Aggrieved against this order, the appellant preferred an appeal to the higher authorities.
The appeal was dismissed by a cryptic order.
It is submitted that the transfer application was made to the Enquiry Officer.
He should have forwarded the application to the appointing authority.
It is submitted that disciplinary authority has appointed the enquiry officer and disciplinary authority can also transfer the enquiry proceedings from one officer to another.
Once a request was made by the petitioner for transfer of the enquiry proceedings, the enquiry officer should have forwarded the application for consideration of the disciplinary authority.
He did not do so.
The enquiry officer also did hot inform the appellant regarding any decision taken on the application for transfer.
He proceeded ex-parte in the matter.
9.
Counsel for the State submitted that transfer of enquiry from one officer to another is discretionary matter and government servant does have vested right for this.
It is true that transfer of enquiry from one officer to another is not granted as a matter of course.
But once an application is made a government servant is entitled to the consideration of the application for transfer by the disciplinary authority.
The Enquiry Officer should have waited for the decision of the disciplinary authority on the application for transfer.
In the present case, the enquiry officer did not forward the application to the disciplinary authority nor he took any decision himself.
This shows that the enquiry officer has not observed the principle of natural justice while holding enquiry in the present case.
There was no justification for holding ex-parte enquiry against the appellant.
The appellant has been denied the opportunity of his defence on account of the enquiry proceedings being ex-parte.
So, the order imposing stoppage of five increments against the appellant is on the basis of enquiry proceedings which were held in violation of the principle of natural justice.
So, the order stopping five increments is plainly contrary to rules and principle of natural justice and is, therefore, liable to be declared void.
10.
The next argument of the counsel for the appellant is that the appellate authority in the present case did not pass a speaking order and also did not observe the provisions of Section 19 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970.
The relevant provisions of the rule are as under :  "Rule 19.
Consideration of appeal.
(2) In the case of an appeal against an order imposing of the penalties specified in Rule 5 or enhancing any penalty imposed under the said rules, the appellate authority shall consider :-  (a) Whether the procedure laid down in these rules has been complied with, and if not, whether such non-compliance has resulted in the violation of any provision of the Constitution of India or in the failure of justice;  (b) Whether the findings of the punishment authority are warranted by the evidence on the record; and  (c) Whether the penalty or the enhanced penalty imposed is adequate, inadequate or severe and pass orders -  (i) Confirming, enhancing, reducing or setting aside the penalty; or  (ii) Remitting the case to the authority which imposed or enhanced the penalty or to any other authority with such direction as it may deem fit in the circumstances of the case."
11.
A perusal of the aforesaid rule shows clearly that appellate authority must consider whether on the evidence of the record charges have been proved; whether the rules and provisions of the Constitution have been observed and whether the punishment imposed is justified on the facts of the case.
The requirement of Rule 19 is mandatory.
The appellant was being considered in the present ease by the appellate authority under the rules.
The appellate authority is exercising quasi judicial function.
It must go through the evidence, consider the submissions made before him and give his decision thereon.
Further the punishing authority must record in writing that provisions of Article 19 are complied with.
In the present case, the appellate authority has not applied its mind to the provisions of Rule 19 at all.
It was necessary for the punishing authority to come to the conclusion whether on the evidence on record charges have been proved.
There is no discussion of evidence in the order.
In view of this, the impugned order is clearly non- speaking and contrary to the rules.
In addition, the provisions of Rule 19 require that punishing authority must consider whether the punishment is justified.
The appellate authority did no apply its mind to the statutory duty cast on it by Rule 19.
On the fact of it, the punishment of stoppage of five increments in the present case looks very harsh.
If the appellate authority had applied its mind to the provisions of Rule 19, then surely, it would have given its finding.
12.
The Supreme Court in RB Bhatt v. Union of India, 1986(1) Service Law Journal 382 has laid down that provisions of Rule 27(2) of the Railway Servants (Discipline and Appeal) Rules, 1986 cast a duty on the appellate authority to consider the points raised in the appeal and give a dispassionate finding.
In Ram Chander v Union of India, 1986(2) S.L.J.
250, the Supreme Court has held that the authority hearing the appeal has to pass a speaking order.
It may be mentioned that the provisions of Rule 19 of the Punjab Civil Services are Pari materia with the provisions of Rule 27(2) of the Railway Servants (Discipline and Appeal) Rules, 1968.
So, in view of the binding decision of the Supreme Court, it is clear that it is the duty of the appellate authority to decide the appeal by passing a speaking order.
Further, it was necessary to give a personal hearing to the appellant according to the Supreme Court judgment.
In the present case, the appellate authority has neither passed a speaking order nor has given any personal hearing to the appellant.
13.
In view of the above discussion, the appeal is allowed with no order as to costs.
The suit of the plaintiff-appellant is decreed.
The order of reversion of the appellant from the post of Superintendent Grade III to that of Assistant is declared illegal, ultra vires, null and void being in violation of Article 311 of the Constitution.
It is declared that the appellant will continue in the service of the State as Superintendent Grade Ill.
It is also declared that the enquiry proceedings, the impugned order of punishment and the appellate order are also declared illegal, ultra vires and null and void.
The Appellant will be entitled to all consequential benefits.
The respondents are directed to reinstate the appellant within three months front today and pay him all back wages with interest @12 per cent.
Appeal allowed.