KL Israni, J - The present petition has been filed by the petitioner under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for issuing writs in the nature of certiorari and mandamus claiming modification of the order dated 1491983 (Annexure P-1) passed by the respondent No. 1 State Industrial Court and also of the order dated 6.6.1983 (Annexure P-4) passed by the respondent No. 2 Labour Court, insofar as they deny the petitioner his monetary benefits for encashment of his leave.
2.
The petitioner was employed in Bhilai Steel Plant on 341958.
Thereafter he was promoted/redesignated as F.A.S.O.
in Rail and Structural Mill (Mechanical Maintenance).
3.
The petitioner filed an application under Section 31(3) read with Section 61 of the MP Industrial Relations Act, 1960, before the respondent No. 2 Labour Court (Annexure P-2).
By order dated 6.6.1983 (Annexure P-4), the respondent No. 2 allowed the said application of the petitioner and held that the petitioner was entitled to earned leave at the rate of one day for 11 working days and 15 days' casual leave in a calendar year.
However, the Labour Court did not award relief to the petitioner as claimed by him from 351963 onwards on account of delay as the petition was filed in the year 1981.
But on appeal before the Industrial Court, Indore (respondent No. 1), relief was granted to the petitioner with effect from 351963 onwards regarding earned leave but the monetary benefit i.e. leave salary for such an accumulated/unutilized leave was not granted.
The claim for encashment of casual leave was not considered because casual leave cannot be carried forward from the previous year.
According to the petitioner, since the employer (respondent No. 3) had denied him such a benefit, he cannot be punished by not getting leave salary benefits.
According to him, as the other respondents had enjoyed the same relief, he should not be denied the same.
He has, therefore, filed this petition claiming modification of the orders Annexures P-1 and P-4, insofar as they deny the monetary benefits i.e. leave salary for the accumulated/unutilized leave.
4.
The respondents have submitted before this Court that this Court, not being an appellate Court, should not interfere in the orders passed by the Courts below and the petitioner is not entitled to seek such relief of modification under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
According to them, they have followed the orders passed by the respondents 1 and 2 by issuing necessary orders Annexures R-2 and R-3.
The orders passed by them legal and valid and do not call for any interference.
5.
The respondents 1 and 2 have substantially granted the relief claimed by the petitioner.
The petitioner is not entitled to encashment of casual leave because it cannot be accumulated and lapses in the same year.
The petitioner was not able to show any rule to this effect.
Thus, the relief of leave salary in respect of casual leave was, therefore, rightly rejected.
6.
Regarding grant of leave salary in respect of earned leave accumulated/unutilized, the Labour Court has negatived the relief on the ground of delay and also on the ground that no such prayer was made by the petitioner in his application Annexure P-2.
We have also gone through this application.
There is no specific plea of the petitioner regarding grant to leave salary for the period claimed by him.
Therefore, the Labour Court has granted the relief to the extent that the petitioner is entitled to earned leave accumulated as permissible under the rules.
The Industrial Court also did not think it proper to interfere with such a finding.
The petitioner has not shown to us the leave rules applicable to him entitling him for encashment of the leave.
According to the petitioner himself, the petition is governed by the standing orders (Plant) framed and certified under the Industrial Employment Act, 1946.
The respondents in their return admitted the same and have produced the standing order, which reads as under :  "12(i) EARNED LEAVE  "The provisions of this section as far as they relate to earned leave and casual leave shall not operate to the prejudice of any right to which the persons employed in the establishment may be entitled under any other or under the terms of any award, agreement, or contract or service provided that when such award, agreement or contract of service provides for a longer leave with wages than provided in this section relation to these two types of leave, such person shall be entitled only to such longer leave."
7.
According to the respondents, encashment of earned leave has to be applied for and obtained at the proper time.
Since he did not do so, the Labour Court as well as the Industrial Court were right in denying such relief to the petitioner.
8.
The petitioner had subsequently amended the petition submitting that according to leave rules, earned leave can be accumulated upto 180 days.
The respondent No. 3 has not followed these rules, The petitioner has annexed the extract of leave rules as Annexure-P/7.
The respondent No. 3 in additional return has submitted that the plant employees are governed by the standing orders and by agreement/settlement arrived at from time to time between the management and the representative Union.
In regard to earned leave, a settlement was arrived at between the management and the representative Union on 1761983.
The relevant clauses of the memorandum of settlement dated 17.6.1983 are extracted and copies thereof are annexed as Annexure R-4.
9.
According to the respondents, rules (Annexure P-7) not applicable in the case of the petitioner.
The rules applicable are as per Annexure R-4.
No rejoinder thereafter was filed by the petitioner.
The petitioner has also not challenged Annexure R-4 in his arguments.
According to the Clause 7102 of Annexure R-4 the limit for accumulation of half pay leave was raised from 90 days to 120 days.
The said clause was implemented from the calendar year 1963 onwards.
Annexure R-4 also does not say about encashment of casual leave.
10.
In view of the fact that both the Courts i.e. the Industrial Court and the Labour Court (respondents 1 and 2 respectively) considered the relief of encashment and had negatived the case on the ground that the petitioner had not claimed the same within time.
In such a case, we are not inclined to interfere in the orders passed by the respondents 1 and 2, which cannot be said to be unjust and unreasonable.
11.
In view of this, the petition fails and is hereby dismissed.
However, the parties are directed to bear their own costs.
Security amount, if any, be refunded to the petitioner.
Petition dismissed.