Abani Mohan Sinha, J - This judgment will govern two appeals FMA No. 454 of 1991 and FMA No. 112 of 1992 which are heard analogously.
These appeals are directed against the judgment and order of learned Single Judge passed on the application filed by the respondent-writ petitioner under Article 226 in writ jurisdiction.
The facts of the case are as follows :  2.
The writ petitioner was substantively appointed in the post of Special Officer, Grade-II in the department of Local Government and Urban Development and later promoted to the post of Assistant Director of the local bodies.
The Municipal Service Commission, the appellant in the present case, appointed him to the post of its Secretary after proper interview and selection in the scale of pay of Rs. 1100-50-1300-60-1900 plus admissible allowances with effect from 1st July, 1986 with approval of Calcutta Municipal Corporation under Regulation 25(1) of the Calcutta Municipal Corporation (Municipal Service Commission Regulation, 1984).
(Vide Annexure-B to the writ petition).
He was duly released from his parent department with effect from 1st July, 1986 and was allowed to keep his lien in his substantive post of Special Officer Grade-II for a period of 2 years from the date of joining his new assignment (Vide Annexure-B).
He was on probation in the post of Secretary to Municipal Service Commission for 1 year.
His case is that he was due to be confirmed to the said post after the end of his probationary period of 1 year according to Rule 16(2) Chapter 3 of the West Bengal Service Rule Part I.
His further case is that prior to the expiry of 2 years' lien from July 1, 1986 to June 30, 1988 he applied for extension of his lien with effect from 1st July, 1988.
The lien was extended on condition that he would revert to the post of his parent department at the end of period of 1 year from 171988 or resign from the parent post on the expiry of that period.
This is evident from Annexure-C Accordingly he gave an undertaking to the department, vide Annexure-D on June 6, 1988.
But the petitioner was surprised to receive an order of his parent department on 16th June, 1988 that the parent department expressed its inability to extend his lien for further period of 1 year beyond 30th June, 1988 and was advised to revert to the post of parent department on 1st July, 1988 vide Annexure-E On receipt of such order of revision he applied to the Chairman of the Municipal Service Commission for his confirmation to the post of Secretary with effect from 1st July, 1987 vide Annexure-F The Municipal Service Commission did not issue any order of confirmation and instead acted on the order of reversion of the parent department and reverted him to his parent post.
He sent a representation to reconsider his prayer for extension of lien to the post of parent department on June 18, 1988, vide Annexure-G His representation was not paid heed to by either of the authorities, i.e., the Municipal Service Commission and also by his parent department.
According to him, two authorities acted mala fide and put him to jeopardy.
He was deprived of his right to be confirmed in the permanent post of Secretary with better pay and emoluments and also he was not favoured with extension of lien of 1 year as promised by his parent department to his post in the parent department and was served with an order of reversion.
Accordingly, he prayed for a writ of mandamus for confirmation in the post of Secretary to the Municipal Service Commission and also for cancelling the order for reversion and for a writ of certiorari and also he prayed for declaration that he has been permanently appointed to the post of Secretary and also for injunction and other reliefs.
The petitioner further states that he was compelled to join his parent post finding no other option to his prejudice and to give up his prospect of being appointed to a better post, i.e., the post of Secretary to the Municipal Service Commission.
3.
The appellants who figured as opposite parties in the original writ proceeding in their affidavit-in-opposition have denied the case of the petitioner on material particulars.
Their case is that they were not satisfied with the service of the writ petitioner and acted on his order of reversion to the parent department and refused to confirm him in the post of Secretary and directed him to revert to the post of his parent department.
They contend that they have acted according to law, i.e. Regulation by which the Municipal Service Commission is governed and that the writ petitioner could not claim lien to his parent post or confirmation to the post of Secretary as of right.
According to them, the writ petition is liable to be dismissed.
4.
The learned single Judge on consideration of the respective contentions of the parties and the case made out in their affidavit-in-opposition and affidavit-in-reply as well as the relevant regulations and other connected papers and documents have found in favour of the writ petitioner and allowed the writ petition.
He set aside the resolutions of the Municipal Service Commission reverting him to his parent post and declared that the writ petitioner should be treated in service of the commission as Secretary with all attending benefits of pay and allowances.
5.
Being aggrieved by such judgment and order, the opposite parties in the writ petition have preferred this appeal.
6.
It has been contended by the appellants in this appeal that the learned trial Judge has fallen into errors in holding that the reversion of the petitioner to his parent post is by way of punishment, It is further contended that the Municipal Service Commission has a right to confirm or not to confirm a temporary employee and can dispense with his service after expiry of his probationary period finding him not suitable for the post.
Such order of termination of a temporary employee on the expiry of his period of probation cannot be treated as a measure adopted by the employer by way of punishment and such termination cannot be deemed to be a stigma on such employee.
According to the appellants, the writ petitioner could not have any cause of action for intervention of the court in the writ jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
7.
The only point that falls for determination in this case is if the judgment of the court below can be sustained in law and in facts.
8.
The learned Government Pleader, Mr. SC, Ukil representing the appellants has drawn our attention to the decision of the Supreme Court : Oil & Natural Gas Commission v. Dr. Md Iskandar Ali, reported in AIR 1980 SC 1242 and has urged that the employer has the authority not to retain in service a probationer appointed in a temporary post finding him unsuitable for the post and even though some sort of enquiry was not proceeded with and that such termination would not attract the provision of Article 311 of the Constitution.
The decision further lays down that even if misconduct, negligence, inefficiency might be the motive or the inducing factor which influenced the employer to terminate the services of the employee and if such power is based on terms of contract, such termination cannot be termed as penalty or punishment.
Adverse remarks in his assessment role by the employer and their refusal to extend the probationary period could not be said to indicate that intention of the authority was to proceed against the employee by way of punishment.
He has referred to a subsequent decision of the Supreme Court which followed the above decision Union of India v. P S Bhat, reported in AIR 1981 SC 957.
This decision reiterated that if the service of a probationer is terminated by an order of termination simpliciter without attaching the stigma to the employee and if the order is not by way of punishment, it would not attract the provision of Article 311.
It added even if the misconduct of the employee was the motive or inducing factor to pass the order of termination the order cannot be said to be by way of punishment.
A similar decision, Commodore Commanding Southern Naval Area v. VN Rajan, AIR 1981 SC 965 has also been relied upon.
It lays down that the termination of the service of an employee when was not by way of punishment but merely on the ground of unsuitability of the employee for the post and no stigma was attached to him by reason of the termination of his service the order of termination could not be said to be vitiated for non-observance of Article 311(2) of the Constitution.
9.
The learned Advocate, Sri Kalyan Banerjee representing the writ petitioner has, on the other hand, urged that in the case of the writ petitioner the provision of Municipal Service Commission Regulation was not followed and there was no justification for his reversion to his parent post and denial of his confirmation to the post of Secretary.
He has referred to a decision Anoop Jaswal v. Government of India, AIR 1984 SC 636 and has urged that the court has the power to consider if the order of discharge or termination is merely camouflage for an order of dismissal of misconduct and court can always examine the real nature of the order to determine whether such order was passed by way of punishment or was on the basis of the allegation of misconduct and that but for the incident the authority would not have passed such order and such order of termination or dismissal would attract the provision of Article 311 which provides for natural justice and also an opportunity to the employee defending himself against the charge levelled against him for his dismissal or termination.
In this context he has referred to a decision Mohinder Singh Gill v. Chief Election Commission, AIR 1978 SC 851 and contended when a statutory functionary makes an order based on certain ground its validity must be judged by the reasons so mentioned and cannot be supplemented by fresh reasons in the shape of affidavit or otherwise and that an order bad in the beginning if come to the court on account of a challenge cannot be got validated by additional ground later brought out.
The attempt of the appellants to base their acts on the decisions cited cannot validate their infirm order.
He has further urged that the acts and conduct of the Municipal Service Commission gave rise to civil consequences, so far his client is concerned.
His civil right was adversely affected for not giving him an opportunity on the principle "audi alteram partem".
His right in the service and his prospect of having better emoluments and status are his civil rights and were adversely affected by the decision of the appellant authorities and as such the intervention of the court was necessary for protection of his such rights.
(paragraph 65 of the decision).
Lastly, he has referred to a decision in support of his contention that the order of his reversion and the order of rejecting his prayer to be confirmed in the post of Secretary on the expiry of period of probation would attract the provision of Article 311 and his order of reversion to a lower post amounted to a punishment.
Sukhbans Singh v. State of Punjab, reported in AIR 1962 SC 1711.
This decision lays down that a probationer officiating to a higher post continues to be such without being reverted after the expiry of period of probation has no legal right to the higher post in which he officiated but merely becomes eligible for being absorbed in the higher post as permanent member.
He still continues to be a probationer and can be reverted to his original post under the service rule even without assigning any reason if his work is found to be unsatisfactory.
The provision of Article 311(2) do not apply to such situation.
But if he is reverted to his original post by way of punishment for misconduct, the provision of Article 311(2) becomes applicable and the reversion made without complying with the provision of Article 311(2) would be illegal.
10.
The learned single Judge has relied on many of the decisions referred to before us at the time of hearing of the appeal by both the sides and has come to a decision in favour of the writ petitioner.
Now the most important question before us if the order of reversion on refusal to extend the period of lien (Annex.
E dated 16th June, 1988) and also the order appointing him to his parent post on reversion from the post of Secretary to the Municipal Service Commission (Annexure H dated 22nd June, 1988) are order of reversion simpliciter on expiry of period of probation or an order of reversion by way of punishment.
11.
It is not disputed that the Calcutta Municipal Corporation Regulation 10 (Municipal Service Commission Regulation, 1984) shall not apply to the case of the writ petitioner who was appointed Secretary to the Municipal Service Commission.
Regulation 25 provides for the method of appointment of Secretary in its sub-regulation (2), which lays down that such recruitment can be made by direct recruitment after advertisement in the newspaper.
It is not disputed that in the present case the recruitment of the writ petitioner was made in response to an advertisement in the newspaper and he possessed the essential qualification as laid down in the Regulation 25 for appointment to the post of Secretary and that he was selected by the Service Commission and was appointed to the post of Secretary.
Regulation 25(1) indicates that the Secretary shall be appointed by the Commission with prior approval of the Corporation and shall be ordinarily on probation for a period of 1 year.
It is evident that in the present case the writ petitioner was initially on probation for 1 year and that his period of probation was extended for a further period of 1 year.
The Municipal Service Commission did not assign any special reason for extending his period of probation although they did not appoint him permanently to the post of Secretary on expiry of his period of probation of 1 year.
12.
Mr. Banerjee in this context has argued that the extension of period of probation on expiry of initial period of probation of 1 year after his appointment to the post of Secretary was done according to Regulation 10 of the Calcutta Municipal Corporation which is not applicable in the present case.
Regulation 10 of the Service Regulation of Calcutta Municipal Corporation is only applicable to the employees of the Corporation and not to the employees of Municipal Service Commission and as such this rule for extending the period of probation after the expiry of initial period of probation of 1 year could not be availed of by the Municipal Service Commission namely, the appellants in the present case.
But apart from this anomalous application of the relevant rules and regulations in dealing with the case of the writ petitioner, the Municipal Service Commission did not follow Regulation 28 which relates to Discipline, Control and Appeal of employees of Municipal Service Commission.
The relevant Regulation may be quoted below for the convenience of consideration :-  "28(1).
The Commission may, for good and sufficient reason :  (b) If the Secretary or the Assistant Secretary holds a lien under the State Government, with the approval of the State Government, require the Secretary of the Assistant Secretary to revert to his appointment under the State Government."
We may again refer to sub-regulation (2) of Regulation 28 which is as follows :  "28(2).
No action under sub-regulation (1) shall be taken until the Secretary or the Assistant Secretary has been given reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken against him.
Provided that this sub-regulation shall not apply where action is taken on the ground of conduct which has led to his conviction of a criminal charge."
This regulation thus indicates that the Commission for good and sufficient reason can revert a Secretary holding lien to any post of parent department under the State Government but before passing an order of reversion the Secretary must be given reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken against him.
In the present case, there is no doubt that the respondent-writ petitioner was reverted to his parent post under the orders of the appellant authority and that before passing such order or giving effect to such order no opportunity, not to speak of reasonable opportunity, was afforded to the writ petitioner for showing cause against the proposed action of reversion which was sought to be taken against him at the relevant time.
It has been urged on behalf of the appellant that such regulation would be applicable only in case of permanent employee of the Commission and not to temporary employee of the Commission and not to a temporary employee as the writ petitioner was.
We are unable to accept this submission made on behalf of the appellant.
The regulation nowhere makes such classification between a temporary or permanent employee so far as application of regulation 28 is concerned.
It, on the other hand, clearly indicates that the Commission may revert a Secretary holding a lien to his permanent post of State Government but before passing such order such officer should be given reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the proposed action to be taken against him.
This regulation also provides for an appeal against the order of the Commission in this regard and such appeal shall be to the Mayor in Council.
Vide Sub-regulation (3) of Regulation 28.
So we are of the view that this regulation 28 was not at all followed in so far as the writ petitioner was concerned who was ordered to revert to his parent post without being heard as to this proposed action of reversion and this rule clearly indicates that reversion is treated as punishment otherwise there would not have been a complete procedure starting from consideration of the competent authority and ending in appeal which may be preferred by the aggrieved party against the order of such authority.
We are of the view that the Municipal Service Commission did not act and conduct themselves according to the regulation made by themselves.
So, the order of the reversion passed by them cannot be justified according to the above regulation.
13.
It has been urged by the learned Government Pleader that no mala fides has specifically been alleged in the writ petition and as such the court should not take cognizance of the allegations made in this respect by the writ petitioner.
Paragraph 28 of the writ petition clearly states that the respondents were bent upon acting mala fide and to cause loss or injury to the petitioner and to anyhow remove him from the post of Secretary to the Municipal Service Commission.
In paragraph 11 of the affidavit-in-opposition filed on behalf of the respondents Nos. 4 and 5 it is only stated that the correctness of allegations in para 28 of the petition is denied.
This simple denial, it may be said, is affected with the doctrine of non-traverse.
When mala fide is imputed on the authority with regard to his removal from the post of Secretary, it was all the more necessary that they should have categorically met this imputation by producing convincing and cogent materials to prove that the charge of mala fide was baseless.
Further it would appear that on 17-6-88 after receipt of the letter of regret from his parent department expressing their inability to extend the period of lien beyond 30th June, 1988 and advising him to revert to his parent post with effect from 1st July, 1988 (Annexure E), he sent representation for his absorption in the permanent post of Secretary of the appellant authority and for his confirmation to the said post.
Vide Annexure F He also sent another letter on June 23, 1988 to his parent department that pending decision on his representation for confirmation in the post of Secretary, his lien might be kept extended.
He expressed unequivocally in his letter that he had no intention to revert to his parent post if his application for confirmation in the post of Secretary was considered and allowed.
In these facts and circumstances it was fair and reasonable on the part of the appellate authority either to allow or reject his prayer for confirmation or absorption assigning reasons for the same.
The Commission instead of considering his representation convened a meeting of the Commission which was held on 20th June, 1988 and recorded in its minutes that Sri Chatterjee was not appointed permanently to the post of Secretary who was appointed on probation against a substantive post and has been continuing on an extended period of probation.
They further held that the Secretary committed gross omissions and commission and he lacked in standard of carefulness and vigilance and that he betrayed the confidence of the commission reposed in him for careless conducting of examination of Junior Assistant that his manner of working tended to cast aspersion on the efficiency or competency or the ability of the commission.
It was also recorded that Sri Chatterjee flouted repeatedly the Chairman's order both verbal and written to effect some redistribution of work between two Assistant Secretaries for toning up the administration of the Commission's office.
It was recorded that the Commission felt that in the interest of the Public Service and in the interest of administrative work of the commission it would not be advisable to confirm Sri Chatterjee in the post of Secretary to make him permanent in the post after the conclusion of his probation period of service.
The minute was produced in response to the order of the court on a writ of certiorari.
It further appeared from para 3 of the minutes that they acted in conformity with the government order, i.e., a government order of reversion of Sri Chatterjee to his parent post on termination of lien to the said post and released him from the post of Secretary with effect from 30th June, 1998 and directed him to revert to his parent post with effect from 1st July, 1988.
14.
It is thus clear that the appellant authority, i.e. the commission did not follow the Municipal Service Commission Regulation framed by them before reverting the writ petitioner to his parent post in which he had a lien.
We have already referred to relevant portion of Regulation 28 (supra) which requires of the Commission to afford an opportunity to the incumbent showing cause before ordering his reversion to the post to which he had lien; the commission should have given him opportunity to meet the charges or ground of reversion which is, in our view, a penal measure according to regulation.
Further they have made some misapplication of Regulation 10 the Municipal Service Commission Regulation which has been quoted at page 46 of the paper book or in para 3 of the affidavit-in-opposition of the appellants Nos. 4 and 5.
This Regulation 10 provides for subjecting an appointee in a substantive or a permanent post for a period of probation of 1 year which may be extended by the appointing authority as its discretion for another year.
We have already held that this Municipal Corporation Service Regulation applies to the employees of Municipal Corporation and not to the employees of Municipal Service Commission for which they have independent service regulation laying down the complete procedure of probation.
This regulation lays down that the initial appointment to the post of Secretary are ordinarily be on probation for 1 year.
This regulation, as already been stated, does not provide what would happen to an employee after rendering service as probationer to a permanent post.
This commission in the fitness of thing and in the routine course of business either would confirm him to the substantive post or terminate his service if they would find him unsuitable for the post to which he was appointed.
The commission did not act in this manner.
Instead they applied or misapplied the regulation 10 of Municipal Corporation Service Regulation in extending the period of probation.
There was no caution or directives of the commission that the incumbent was required to improve his services before his absorption to a permanent post.
It may be construed, in the facts and circumstances, and from the manner of working of the Commission that they had no cause of anxiety or grievances as to the services of the incumbent and as such they allowed him to continue his period of probation.
When he laid his claim for confirmation or absorption to the post of the Secretary, they suddenly woke up from their slumber of indifference and began examining his acts and conducts and performance as Secretary and found adversely against him behind his back, as inefficient, negligent, careless and insubordinate and all the vices that completely made him according to them, unsuitable for the post and led them to recommend his reversion in the interest of public service and in the interest of administrative work of the commission.
All these are recorded ex-parte in the minutes of the commission which sat for consideration of the representation of the respondent writ petitioner.
If these were not stigma, one would ask what they would be.
15.
Mr. Banerjee, learned advocate representing respondent-writ petitioner has referred to a decision Om Prakash Maurya v. U. P. Cooperative Sugar Factories Federation, reported in (1986) Supp.
SCC 95 and has urged that the probationer continuing even after the expiry of maximum period of extension of probation permissible under rules without being confirmed would be deemed to have been confirmed and therefore cannot be reverted to a lower substantive post treating to be on probation.
It has been held that where appointment on promotion, (here the initial appointment) made on probation is for a specific period and the employee is allowed to continue in the post after the expiry of the probationary period without any specific order of confirmation, he would be deemed to continue on probation provided the rules do not provide contrary to it.
If, however, the rules provide that an employee appointed against a regular vacancy cannot be placed on probation for more than a specific period the employee will stand confirmed by implication after expiry of that period.
In the present case, the regulation provides for a period of probation for 1 year to the post of Secretary and the commission instead of confirming him after the expiry of such period allowed him to continue his probation although there is no specific provision for it in the Municipal Service Commission Regulation, it should be deemed that the writ petitioner should have been confirmed in the post of Secretary according to the said regulation.
He has also referred to a decision State of Punjab v. Dharam Singh, reported in AIR 1968 SC 1210, which reiterated the above decision cited which lays down on a probationer officiating in a permanent post was allowed to continue in the post beyond the maximum period of probation fixed by the rules without express order of confirmation the officer on probation must be deemed to have been confirmed to the post of which he was appointed and the appointing authority has no power to dispense with his service on the ground, that is, work or conduct during the work on probation is unsatisfactory and if the appointing authority which has right to remove him from service by way of punishment must give him an opportunity of defending him against the proposed charge and punishment in view of the constitutional protection under Article 311.
16.
On an analysis of the facts and circumstances of the case as disclosed by materials on record and the laws applicable to such facts, we are of the view that the commission had come to a finding as to the efficiency, negligence, insubordination, lack of vigilance of the writ petitioner as secretary and then sought to take the cover of acting in conformity with the government order of reversion issued by his parent department on termination of his lien.
In our view, it is not an order of reversion of the writ petitioner to his parent post simpliciter and the fact of not confirming him to the post of Secretary is condemnation of the writ petitioner without an opportunity of being heard and following the rule of natural justice of "audi alteram 'partem" as enshrined in Article 311 of the Constitution.
The Supreme Court in the decision of Union Carbide Corporation v. Union of India, AIR 1992 SC 248 held that omission to comply with the requirement of this rule as a general rule vitiates a decision.
It cannot be pleaded that hearing or no hearing, the result would be the same in order to avoid the application of the rule.
The citizen is entitled to be under the rule of law and not the rule of discretion and to remedy the constitutional right to judicial discretion is to shift the foundation of freedom from the rock to the sand (para 79).
The decision Cantonment Board v. Taramoni, AIR 1992 SC 61 reiterates the principle that in view of ever expanding scope under Article 14 no order shall be passed at the back of a person, prejudicial in nature to him when it entails civil consequence.
The affected party has a right to be heard before a decision is taken against him.
We cannot accept the argument of the learned Government Pleader that the acts of mala fide should be given in lucid details.
It is for the court exercising writ jurisdiction of mandamus and certiorari to consider the grievances of the writ petitioner with all the relevant materials produced before the court and to construe the reliefs to be given to the aggrieved party, if he deserves such relief in the fact and circumstances of a particular case.
The court can grant, mould or restrict the relief in a manner most appropriate to the situation before it in such a way as to advance the interest of justice, Indian Aluminium Co Ltd v. Thane Municipal Corporation, AIR 1992 SC 53.
See also Orissa Cement v. State of Orissa, AIR 1991 SC 1676.
We hold that it was incumbent on the part of the Commission, i.e. the appellant authorities before us to give an opportunity to the writ petitioner to show cause according to regulation 28 of the Municipal Service Regulation before releasing him or reverting him from the post of Secretary.
It has been urged that this point was not taken before the trial court.
It is not correct state of affairs, for the supplementary affidavit on behalf of the writ petitioner filed during the pendency of the writ proceedings clearly mentions that the orders passed by the commission were in clear violation of rule 28 of the Municipal Service Commission Regulation, 1984.
The trial court although had not adverted to such point, in appeal this court can deal with and consider the impact and import of such regulation in relation to the case of the petitioner as it is purely a point of law.
(Vide State of UP v. Dr. Anupam Gupta, AIR 1992 SC 932 : 1992(2) SCT 292).
17.
Thus, on consideration of all the facts and circumstances and the laws on the point, we find no merit in the appeals.
The judgment and order of the trial court are hereby affirmed.
The appeals stand dismissed without any costs.
Such order should be given effect to by appellants within one month of the communication of the order.
Bhagabati Prasad Banerjee, J - I agree.
Appeal dismissed.