JL Gupta, J. (Oral) - The plaintiff-appellant's suit for a declaration that he was entitled to be considered for promotion as Assistant Engineer (Electrical and Mechanical) with effect from January 4, 1980 was decreed by the trial Court.
The judgment of the trial Court having been reversed by the lower appellate Court, he has come to this court in the second appeal.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The appellant who belongs to the category of Scheduled Castes had joined service as a Superintendent Grade-II (B & M) under the Ministry of Defence on September 24, 1964.
In 1970 he was promoted as Superintendent Grade-I He was confirmed as such in the year 1972.
3.
Certain vacancies in the cadre of Assistant Engineers had become available in the year 1979.
The number of existing and anticipated vacancies was fixed at 74.
The department prepared a list of 425 persons who fell within the zone of consideration.
However, ultimately names of 348 persons were considered.
4.
Out of these 74 vacancies it is alleged that 15 had been reserved for the members of the Scheduled Castes and yet the appellant who belongs to that category was not promoted.
Aggrieved by this action, the appellant filed the suit.
5.
On behalf of the defendant-respondent various objections were raised.
It was, however, pleaded that the department had prepared a list of 425 individuals.
The Departmental Promotion Committee however had confined the selection to a lesser number "to avoid unnecessary super sessions."
It was further averred that "the petitioner being far junior, could not have been included in the maximum zone of consideration..." The appellant filed a replication averring inter-alia that persons junior to him had been included in the list.
6.
On the pleadings of the parties, the learned trial court framed the following issues :-  1.
Whether the plaintiff was entitled to be included in the list published on 4180 for promotion to Asstt.
Engineer E/M against the reserved quota and entitled to the promotion sought ?
OPP.
2.
Whether the suit is not maintainable in the present form ?
OPD.
3.
Whether this court has no jurisdiction to try this suit ?
OPD.
4.
Whether the suits properly valued for the purposes of court fee and jurisdiction ?
OPP.
5.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the declaration prayed for ?
OPP.
6.
Relief.
The learned trial Court recorded a finding on issue No. 1 and declared that the appellant was "entitled to be promoted as Assistant Engineer E/M with effect from 411980 and his name should have been published in the panel released by E-in-C Branch vide Army Headquarters letter No. 68020/AE/79/EIR dated 411980 and he is entitled to the grade of Assistant Engineer E/M with effect from 411980...".
Aggrieved by this judgment and decree, Union of India filed the appeal.
The learned appellate Court found that "the DPC considered 348 eligible Superintendents E/M Grade I i.e. field of consideration being 5 times against 74 vacancies.
This was necessitated because two scheduled castes candidates figured at the bottom of the seniority list.
i.e. 357 and 362 and at numbers 343 and 348 of the officers considered by DPC.... As no suitable scheduled caste/scheduled tribe candidate was available for promotion, the dereservation was resorted to."
It further found that the candidates shown at serial Numbers 73 and 74 recommended for promotion were senior to the plaintiff.
7.
Mr. RD Bawa, learned counsel for the appellant has raised a two-fold contention.
He submits that the judgment and decree passed by the lower appellate court is vitiated as there is nothing on the record to show that M/s PS Sabharwal and VS Chhinde were senior to him.
He further contends that the appellant had a right to be considered and his claim having not been considered the suit filed by him deserved to be decreed.
The claim made on behalf of the appellant has been controverted by Mr. SK Pippat learned counsel.
8.
Mr. Bawa at the very outset conceded that in accordance with the prevalent instructions and evidence on the record, the department has to prepare joint panel for the persons belonging to the general category as well as those belonging the reserved category to Scheduled Castes etc.
The department is not required to prepare separate panels for the candidates belonging to what has come to be described as the general and the Scheduled Castes/reserved categories respectively.
He, however, contends that the department should have been prepared a panel containing names of officers equal to six times the vacancies viz. 74 x 6 = 444 persons instead of confining the consideration to only 348 candidates.
9.
Leaving aside the fact that the appellant has led no evidence in support of the contention, there is nothing on the record to show that the appellant's name appears at any place upto serial No. 444 of the seniority list of Superintendents Grade-I The appellant could have had a legitimate grievance if it was established on the record that on the basis of existing seniority he was within the field of choice, but his name was not considered.
Learned counsel for the appellant has not been able to point out anything from the record to show that the appellant's name appeared in any seniority list even up to serial No. 444.
Consequently, even if the field of choice was extended upto serial No. 444 the petitioner could not have got any relief whatsoever as he did not come within the zone of consideration.
10.
Faced with this situation, Mr. Bawa contended that M/s PS Sabharwal and VS Chhinde were junior to him.
For this purpose he has placed reliance on Ex P-A which is a copy of an order dated November 18, 1971 showing that Mr. Priti Pal Singh Sabharwal had been promoted as Superintendent Grade I with effect from August 14, 1971.
However, it appears from a perusal of the evidence that Mr. Sabharwal had been given retrospective promotion and as such his seniority had been refixed.
A perusal of the statement of Mr. Jagjit Singh, DW-1 shows that the department has considered the claim for promotion of only such Superintendents Grade-I as had been appointed upto March 29, 1967.
Admittedly the appellant had been promoted to this post in May/June 1970.
It is thus clear that no one who had been promoted after the appellant was considered by the departmental promotion committee.
Still further, Mr. Bawa has not been able to show that the assertion of Mr. Jagjit Singh that claims of only such persons as had been appointed as Superintendents Grade I upto March 29, 1967 were considered was even challenged during the course of cross examination.
11.
The finding recorded by the lower appellate court is based on appreciation of evidence.
Nothing has been pointed out to show that the findings are perverse or contrary to evidence on record.
Accordingly, there appears to be no reason to upset the finding of fact recorded by the lower appellate court.
12.
In any event, Mr. Sabharwal is not a party to these proceedings.
It would be unfair to record a finding against him in his absence.
This is all the more so as no averment whatsoever has been made in the plaint to the effect that either Mr. Sabharwal or Mr. Chhinde was junior to the plaintiff-appellant cannot be allowed to make out a case different from the one originally pleaded by him.
13.
Mr. Bawa then contends that there is nothing on record to show that 15 posts which had been originally reserved for Scheduled Castes were actually de-reserved at any time.
There is no merit in this contention.
Firstly, no such plea has been raised in the plaint.
Secondly, even otherwise the total number of posts was 74.
According to the counsel for the appellant, the department had to consider candidates equal to six-times the number of posts.
Mr. Bawa is unable to point out any evidence on record to show that the appellant's name appears in the seniority list even upto the number viz. 444.
Consequently, even if it is found that there was no order of de-reservation, or that in fact such an order could not have been passed, it would make no material difference because the appellant's name did not fall within the field of choice.
It has been admitted by the learned counsel for the appellant that there is nothing on the record to indicate that his name appeared even upto the serial No. 444 in the seniority list of Superintendents Grade-I In such a situation, there is no merit in this contention.
Accordingly, there is no merit in this appeal.
It is dismissed.
In the circumstances of the case, I leave the parties to bear their own costs.
Appeal dismissed.