Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - Management of Chandigarh Transport Undertaking is the petitioner in this case.
It is aggrieved by order dated 18.9.89 passed by the Labour Court.
It was observed that "ends of justice will be fully met if workman is also given continuity of service right from the date of his termination i.e. 20th September 1983 and his past service is taken into consideration.
However, he will not be paid any back wages and the period he remained out of employment i.e. from 20th September, 1983 to 12th September 1985 shall be treated as leave of the kind due to the workman'.
2.
A few facts may be noticed :-  Respondent No. 1 was working as a Driver with the petitioner-management in the year 1978.
The vehicle which he was driving met with an accident.
He was tried for an offence under Section 304-A of the Indian Penal Code.
He was convicted and sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for one year and to pay a fine of Rs. 300/-.
The learned Sessions Judge dismissed his appeal.
His revision petition was partly accepted by this Court on August 9, 1983.
Sentence of imprisonment was reduced to four months and a fine of Rs. 2000/- was also imposed by this Court.
Thereafter, he was given a show-cause notice and ultimately, vide order dated September 20, 1983, his services were terminated.
It appears that the respondents raised an industrial dispute.
On November 20, 1984, the appropriate authority made reference of the dispute to the Labour Court.
While the reference was pending, the petitioner was offered fresh appointment and he joined on September 12, 1985.
He relinguished his claim with regard to the payment of back wages, but prayed that he may be deemed to have been appointed in service without any break.
The Labour Court has accepted this plea and allowed the claim of the workman aggrieved by this order, the petitioner management has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
3.
The only point urged by Mr. Rajesh Bindal, learned counsel for the petitioner is that relief given by the Labour Court is beyond the scope of the dispute referred to by the appropriate authority.
On the other hands Mr. Sarjit Singh, learned counsel for the respondent-workman submits that the award given by the Labour Court is perfectly legal and valid.
4.
It is undoubtedly correct that issue referred to the Labour Court related to the validity of the order of termination passed by the petitioner-management.
However, the Labour Court has recorded a finding of fact that various workmen who were convicted under Section 304-A of the Indian Penal Code, have been reinstated and given benefit of continuity of service.
It has further found that conduct of Kuldip Singh was not bad.
The learned Labour Court has also found that Tilak Raj who was convicted under Section 304-A of the Indian Penal Code had been reinstated with continuity of service and back wages.
On these promises, it has come to a conclusion that respondent workman "has been discriminated by the management.....".
These facts have not been controverted by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
In fact, nothing has been pointed out to show that the cases of Tilak Raj etc. were different from that of the respondent-workman.
5.
Technically, petitioner is right.
However, in exercise of the discretionary jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, I am not inclined to act in favour of the petitioner especially when it has been found guilty of violating Article 14 of the Constitution.
This is all the more so in view of the fact that the petitioner is stated to have already retired and he will get by virtue of this award some pension so as to be able to sustain himself.
According, I find no merit in this petition.
It is dismissed.
In the circumstances of the case, I make no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.