NK Kapoor, J - This is plaintiff's regular second appeal against the judgment of Additional District Judge, Rohtak, by which the appeal filed by him against the judgment and decree of the trial court was dismissed.
2.
Briefly stated, the plaintiff filed a suit for declaration to the effect that he continued to be an employee of the Market Committee, Rohtak, as Mandi Supervisor and the resolution No. 14 dated 1871972 passed by defendant No. 2 and the order of defendant No. 1 dated 2171992 are not binding upon the plaintiff and the same are illegal, null and void.
The plaintiff further sought the relief of injunction restraining the defendants from preventing the plaintiff from discharging his duties as a Mandi Supervisor, Market Committee, Rohtak.
According to the plaintiff, he was appointed as an Auction Recorder in the year 1968 by the Market Committee, Rohtak, and was thereafter promoted as Mandi Supervisor and at this post he was discharging his duties to the entire satisfaction of his superiors.
It is further the case of the plaintiff that on account of some political differences of respondent No. 1 with his father a conspiracy was hatched by defendant No. II with defendant No. 2 leading to transfer of the plaintiff from Mandi Supervisor to a Fee Collector which thereafter led to his transfer to a place outside the district i.e at Karnal.
According the plaintiff to the resolution transferring the plaintiff as Mandi Supervisor was illegal and void for the precise reason that there was no such item on the agenda for the proposed transfer nor there was any proposal by any member of the committee.
Besides, the plaintiff alleged that the post of Mandi Supervisor was higher to that of a Fee Collector and so his appointment from Mandi Supervisor to a Fee Collector was a demotion which could not be done in law without giving him a slow cause notice.
3.
The defendants, in pursuance to the notice of the Court, put in appearance, filed written statement and controverted various averments made in the plaint.
The defendants specifically denied the allegations of the plaintiff that the action of the defendants was in any way politically motivated.
It was also denied that the post of Mandi Supervisor was superior to that of a Fee Collector.
On the contrary, it was alleged that the post of Mandi Supervisor and that of Fee Collector were of the same status and carried the same pay scale.
The defendants further contended that there was no bar of transferring an employee from one market committee to another under section 3(ii) of the Punjab Agricultural Produce Markets Act, 1961 (for short "the Act") etc.  4.
On the pleadings of the parties, following issues were framed:-  1.
Whether the resolution of the Market Committee, Rohtak, dated 1871972 was passed maliciously and without authority ?
OPP.
2.
Whether the transfer of the plaintiff from the post of Mandi Supervisor to that of Fee Collector is unauthorised?
OPP.
3.
Whether the plaintiff while working as Fee Collector had to deal with accounts ?
If so, to what effect ?
OPD.
4.
If issue No. 3 is proved, whether the Board is not competent to transfer the plaintiff out of district ?
OPP.
5.
Relief.
5.
Initially the suit was dismissed by the trial Court vide judgment dated 2571974 but in appeal the same was remanded after framing the following additional issues :-  l. Whether plaintiff did not deal with accounts as Mandi Supervisor and if so to what effect ?
OPP.
2.
Whether the plaintiff would be considered to be working as Mandi Supervisor on 2171972 on which day he was transferred by the Board as Fee Collector and if so to what effect ?
OPP.
6.
The trial Court decided issue No. 1 in favour of the defendants and against the plaintiff.
Issue No. 2 was not pressed in view of the amending Act 21 of 1973.
Issue No. 3 was deemed to be redundant.
Issue No. 1 (framed by the appellate Court) was decided against the plaintiff.
Issue No. 4 was decided by the trial Court in favour of defendants holding that the Board was quite competent to transfer the plaintiff outside the District.
Thus, in view of these findings, the trial Court dismissed the suit of the plaintiff.
7.
Before the lower appellate Court, counsel for the appellant impugned the resolution dated 1871972 on the ground that the same was passed without the necessary quorum.
The appellant further contended that notice of the meeting was not given to Shri Nathu Ram, one of the members of the Market Committee, (which fact was admitted by Sh. Suraj Bhan, Secretary of the Market Committee) and this way the meeting was held without the quorum.
This objection of the appellant was brushed aside by the Court simply on the ground that no such plea was taken by the plaintiff and as such the Court cannot take notice of the fact of lack of notice upon one of the members, namely, Nathu Ram.
Even the plea of the appellant that he could not be transferred from one district to another did not find favour with the lower appellate Court and accordingly the appeal was dismissed.
8.
This appeal was admitted on a substantial question of law i.e. whether the resolution dated 1871972 appointing the appellant as a Fee Collector was without authority and void.
The learned counsel for the appellant has drawn attention of the Court to the statement of Suraj Bhan, Secretary of the Market Committee, where in he has specifically admitted that notice of that meeting was not given to Nathu Ram, one of the members of the Market Committee.
The counsel, accordingly, argued that in view of this un rebutted piece of evidence, the meeting, in law, would be deemed to have been held without quorum.
For this proposition, the counsel drew the attention of the Court to the following observations in case George Bell v. Royal Western India Turf Club Ltd, AIR 1946 Bombay page 88:  "In the absence of any rule to the contrary, where a committee or other body is empowered to act by a certain number of its members as a quorum, it is well established that there is no quorum, and the proceedings of the meeting are invalid, unless notice of the meeting is given to all the members of that committee or other body.
A "quorum" in fact means a given number of individuals out of the whole body, all of whom have had notice of the meeting, who have attended the meeting."
Besides this, counsel by referring to section 20 of the Act urged that it is only the services of the Secretary or any employee dealing with the accounts of the Committee who could be transferred, that is to say that the plaintiff, who was a Mandi Supervisor, could not be transfered from a place outside the District.
This way transfer made by the defendant besides being illegal is also mala fide.
9.
The learned counsel for the respondents, however, contends that in view of the amendment substituted by the Haryana Act No. 21 of 1973 in section 20 of the Act, the appeal, in fact, has become infructuous for the reason that now all such employees of the Market Committee are transferable to any where within the State of Haryana.
10.
I have considered the respective submissions made by the counsel for the parties and perused the other relevant evidence on the record.
There is no denying the fact that the transfer of the plaintiff was made in haste soon after passing of the resolution dated 1871972.
The plaintiff, who was a Mandi Supervisor, was redesignated as a Fee Collector and thereafter transferred to Karnal vide order dated 2171972.
There is merit in the contention of the counsel for the appellant that there was no provision in section 20 of the Act 1961 whereby such an employee could be transferred outside the district.
Despite all this, it cannot be lost sight of that the Act stood amended vide Amending Act 21 of 1973 whereby under section 20(6) the Board had been conferred power to transfer any member of the service anywhere within the State of Haryana.
In this view of the mater, the appeal, indeed, has become in fructuous and the same is dismissed.
The parties will, however, bear their own costs.