Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - Through the present writ petition, the petitioner has prayed for issuance of directions to the respondents for issuing the posting orders to him as Assistant Sub Inspector of Police, the post to which he was regularly selected.
2.
The case put forward by the petitioner is that he was selected by Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana as Assistant Sub Inspector of Police and was appointed as such by the Superintendent of Police, Faridabad vide letter dated 2041990 (Annexure P-1 to the writ petition) and the post to which he was appointed though was temporary but was likely to continue.
The petitioner was sent to Police Training College, Madhuban on 161990 for basic training, after he had joined his duties as ASI on 2041990.
3.
It is also the case of the petitioner that during the period of training, the petitioner was informed that he was selected as Probationer Inspector in Haryana Police on 541991 and the basic training which was being undergone by him was the same for the post of Inspector.
The petitioner was discharged from the post of probationer, Inspector vide D.I.G.
HAP, Madhuban order dated 571991.
4.
It is also the case of the petitioner that since the order of discharging of the petitioner from the post of probationer Inspector was illegal, so he challenged the same through Civil Writ Petition No. 10099-1991 which was disposed by this Court in terms of order in C.W.P.
No. 10446 of 1991 dated 1981991.
It is also the case of the petitioner that on his prayer, the Division Bench of this Court had allowed him to complete his training by way of interim order on the grounds that training for Assistant Sub-Inspector and Inspector was the same.
However, on the basis of final order in the writ petition, the petitioner was discharged from the post of Inspector Police vide order dated 1111991.
However, the said order has been challenged by the petitioner in the Supreme Court through SLP which is stated to be pending.
5.
It is also the case of the petitioner that his service as Assistant Sub Inspector was never terminated nor he resigned from the said post nor the post was abolished and on discharging from the post of Inspector, he was entitled to continue as Assistant Sub Inspector.
His appointment as Assistant Sub Inspector of Police was also challenged in this Court through CWP No. 5093 of 1991 which was ultimately dismissed on 711992 vide order Copy Annexure P 5.
After the discharge from the post of Police Inspector, the petitioner represented to the authorities for posting him as Assisstand Sub Inspector including representations dated 16121991, 1121992 and 3061992 (Copies Annexure P-6 to P-8) but to no effect.
The petitioner under these circumstances has prayed for directions to the respondents to allow him to Join as ASI along with all the consequential benefits.
6.
The respondents have contested the claim of the petitioner inter alia on the grounds that the petitioner was discharged from the post of Inspector as a result of order of this Court in CWP 5123 of 1991 and that he cannot hold two posts simultaneously and is not entitled to the post of probationer Assistant Sub Inspector and an inference was sought to be drawn that he is deemed to have resigned his first appointment as Assistant Sub Inspector.
Hence he has no claim for coming back to the said post on his failure to get the post of Probationer Inspector and after his joining training as Inspector he was never considered as Assistant Sub Inspector so he has no claim to the post as there was no lien as he had wilfully left the post of probationer Assistant Sub Inspector.
It is however, admitted that the petitioner after completing his training was posted as Probationer Inspector in 4th Battalion from which he was discharged on the basis of judgment of this Court in CWP No. 5123/1991 vide Annexure R-1 dated 1111991.
7.
I have perused the paper book and considered the arguments of the counsel for the parties advanced at the Bar.
8.
Undisputedly, the petitioner was selected as Assistant Sub Inspector of Police through the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana, who was undergoing training as ASI during which he was also selected as Inspector of Police.
Admittedly, the training for both of ASI and Inspector at the Police Training College was the same which was completed by the petitioner by virtue of interim orders passed by this Court in this writ petition.
It is also not in dispute that the petitioner did not resign his post of Assistant Sub Inspector nor the said post was abolished nor he was discharged from the same and it was due to his selection for the post of Inspector that he continued the same training but as Inspector.
One likes better job in his life and there was nothing wrong when the petitioner accepted the offer of post of Inspector and he switched over to the said post only because of his selection during his training and he had not left the post of Assistant Sub Inspector for any other reason.
Both the posts being in the same department and the training being common, the department also does not appear to have suffered any loss particularly when the petitioner has completed the training.
It was his bad luck that he had to vacate the post of Inspector due to court order and in my opinion under these circumstances he should not be deprived of the post of Assistant Sub Inspector for which he was regularly selected through Subordinate Services Selection Board.
9.
For the reasons recorded above, I accept the writ petition and direct the resspondents to continue the petitioner as Assistant Sub Inspector of Police in pursuance of his appointment letter Annexure P-1 with all the consequential benefits and he may be taken back in service within one month.
However, the petitioner will not be entitled to any pay and allowances for the period from 1111991 till his taking back in service.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.