NK Kapoor, J - This is defendant,s regular second appeal against the judgment and decree of the Additional District Judge, Patiala, dated 301278 whereby the appeal filed by the plaintiff was accepted thereby decreeing his suit.
2.
It is the case of the plaintiff that he was appointed as a Clerk on selection by the SSS Board in Rajasthan Feeder Circle, Ferozepur, by the Superintending Engineer II on 19663.
It is alleged that he was retrenched w.e.f.
131967 and was subsequently provided with equivalent job on 8.6.67.
It is the case of the plaintiff that the period from 19363 to 7.6.1967 was not treated towards duty which act of the defendant is illegal, ultra vires, unconstitutional etc. and so prayed for setting aside the same and also for mandatory injunction directing the defendant to treat such a period towards duty.
3.
The defendant put in appearance, filed written statement and resisted the claim of the plaintiff on the ground that the suit of the plaintiff is not maintainable in the present form, non joinder of necessary parties and civil court has no jurisdiction.
On merits, it was alleged that due to reduction in the cadre of Rajasthan Feeder Circle plaintiffs' services were terminated as per terms of his appointment and subsequently on the availability of the post of a Clerk, his request for appointment was considered and a fresh appointment was ordered by the Superintending Engineer Rajasthan Feeder Circle.
His fresh appointment has nothing to do with the previous appointment.
It was further alleged that the plaintiff remained in service from 1961963 to 28.2.1967 which period was treated as on duty.
Similarly, the plaintiff was allowed terminal leave for 42 days as due to him from 131967 to 11467 as admissible under the Rules.
It was further alleged that services of the plaintiff were terminated w.e.f.
131967 which he did not challenge and so the same has become time barred.
4.
On the pleadings of the parties, following issues were framed :-  1) Whether the impugned order is wrong illegal, void etc. as alleged in the plaint ?
2) Whether the suit is maintainable in the present form ?
3) Whether the suit is within time ?
OPP.
4) Whether the court has jurisdiction to try the present suit ?
OPD.
5) Whether the suit is properly valued for the purposes of court fee and jurisdiction ?
OPP.
6) Whether the notice served on the plaintiff is valid ?
OPP.
7) Whether the suit is bad for non-joinder of necessary parties ?
OPD.
8.
Relief.
The trial Court decided issue No. 1 against the plaintiff.
Issue Nos. 2 to 7 were not pressed by the defendant and so were decided against the defendant.
In view of the finding on issue No. 1, the suit of the plaintiff was dismissed by the trial Court.
5.
Before the lower appellate Court the appellant assailed the finding of the trial Court under issue No. 1 on the ground that the Court overlooked the amended Rule 317 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules and this way the judgment was wholly vitiated.
The lower appellate Court after referring to the amended Rule 317 of the Punjab Civil Services Rule came to the conclusion that, in fact, the appellant was entitled to the period from 19.6.1967 being treated as on duty as he was subsequently absorbed in the same cadre from which he was retrenched due to reduction in the posts.
Resultantly, the finding of the trial Court under issue No. 1 was reversed thereby accepting the appeal and setting aside the judgment and decree of the trial Court.
6.
The sole submission of the learned counsel for the appellant is that the lower appellate Court has not correctly interpreted the amended Rule 317 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules which is reproduced hereunder :-  "In the Punjab Civil Services Rules Volume II (hereinafter referred to as the said rules after Rule 317 the following shall be added as new rule namely :- 3.17-A : This rule shall applying the case of employees retiring from service on or after 1st November, 1968.
Subject to other provisions of Section-C of this chapter and except in the cases mentioned below all services rendered on establishment, interrupted or continuous shall count as qualifying service.
(1) Service paid from contingencies.
(2) Service rendered in work charged establishment.
(3) Casual or daily rated service.
(4) Suspension adjudged as a specific penalty.
Note: In cases where an officer dies or is permitted to retire while under suspension the suspension will not be treated as per interruption.
(5) Resignation of public service except where such resignation is with proper permission and to take up another appointment service in which counts in full or in part for pension.
(6) Joining time for which no allowance are admissible under Rule 915 of CSR Volume I, Part-II.
(7) If any unauthorised leave of absence occurs in continuation of authorised leave of absence and if then post of the service of the absentee is forfeited.
(8) Transfer to a non-qualifying service on establishment not under Government control or if such transfer is not made by the competent authority and transfer to service in a grant-in-aid school.
(A Government employee who voluntarily resigned qualifying service cannot claim the benefit under this clause.)
(9) Removal from public service for misconduct, insolvency, inefficiency not due to age or failure to pass an examination will entail forfeiture of past service.
Note: In the case of a Central Government employee who is permanently transferred to the Punjab Govt. and becomes subject to these rules, the pensionary benefit admissible for service under the Govt. of India Rules and the liability for such benefits shall be allocated in accordance with the prevalent orders.
Clarification :- Even after the introduction of Rule 317 (a) and deletion of Rule 4.12 the following cases do not entail forfeiture of past service.
(a) Authorised leave of absence.
(b) Addition of post or loss of appointment owing to reduction in Establishment.
(Post or appointment means a post of appointment service which qualifies for pension).
In the present case, the plaintiff was retrenched due to reduction in the posts and was absorbed by the department as soon as a post equivalent to the one he was holding become available.
The amended rule apply on the facts of the present case.
Thus, no fault is found with the judgment and decree of the Additional District Judge, Patiala.
No other point has been urged by the counsel for the appellant.
The appeal is without merit and the same is consequently dismissed.