RS Mongia, J (Oral) - The petitioner had appeared in the Examination of B.Com held by the Delhi University in the year 1991.
Before the result was declared she sat in the entrance test held by the Panjab University for admission to the B.Ed.
course for the Session 1991-92.
The duration of the course is one year.
The petitioner was successful in the entrance test.
Before she was to appear in the interview for admission to B.Ed.
course in the Government College of Education, Chandigarh her result of B.Com.
was declared by the Delhi University in which she obtained 378% marks.
Initially, she submitted to the College Authorities a provisional certificate showing her marks, a copy of which has been attached as Annexure P-1.
Thereafter, she also submitted the original certificate from the Delhi University showing that she had passed her B.Com.
Examination obtaining 378% marks.
She was called for interview by the College Authorities and was ultimately granted admission.
It may be observed here that according to the eligibility criteria for admission to the B.Ed.
course, only those candidates were eligible to appear in the entrance test who had obtained at least 45% marks in the qualifying Examination.
Admittedly, the petitioner did not secure the minimum requisite percentage of marks in the qualifying Examination.
In spite of that, she was admitted by the College Authorities in the B.Ed.
course.
When the petitioner's application was forwarded to the University by the College Authorities for allowing her to appear in the B.Ed.
Examination which was to be held in March, 1992, she was declined permission by the University to sit in the examination on the ground that she initially ineligible to get admission in the B.Ed.
course in-as-much as she had obtained less than 45% marks in the qualifying Examination.
This led the petitioner to file the present Writ Petition.
The motion Bench while issuing notice of motion on March 24, 1992 permitted the petitioner to take the B.Ed.
Examination which was to commence on March 26, 1992.
2.
In pursuance of the direction of this Court, the petitioner did appear in the B.Ed.
Examination held by the University in March, 1992.
When ultimately, the Writ Petition was admitted on July 22, 1992, the motion Bench had directed the University to declare the result of the petitioner and I am told that the petitioner has passed the Examination in the Ist Division.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that when the petitioner had sat in the entrance test for admission to the B.Ed.
Course, her result of B.Com.
had not been declared.
After the said result was declared by the Delhi University she duly informed the College Authorities of having obtained 378% marks.
In other words, the learned counsel submitted that the petitioner never withheld any information from the College Authorities and never tried to mislead the Authorities.
In spite of the fact that the petitioner had obtained less than the requisite percentage of marks in the qualifying test, she was not only called for the interview by the College Authorities but was in fact given admission also.
According to the learned counsel, it was not open to the respondent Authorities to cancel the admission or decline permission to the petitioner to sit in the B.Ed.
final Examination as the petitioner had not only completed the entire Course but in fact had also appeared in the Examination by virtue of the interim orders of this Court.
If any body was to be blamed for the wrong admission it could be the College Authorities.
4.
On the other hand, the learned counsel for the respondent-University submitted that there is an important note published in the prospectus for the information of the candidates which is to the following effect :-  "IMPORTANT NOTE The admission of all the applicants to the Test is purely provisional.
The verification of eligibility conditions will be done by the Colleges concerned at the time of admission to the course.
If on verification it is found that a candidate does not fulfil the eligibility conditions, his candidature will be cancelled and he will have no claim what- so-ever against the University/College.
The candidates are, therefore, advised in their own interest to go through the eligibility conditions carefully and make sure about their eligibility before applying for the Test.
PART B - GENERAL RULES : The result of Entrance Test shall, ipso facto not entitle a candidate to get admission in a college where he intends to seek admission.
It will be the responsibility of the candidate to make sure about his eligibility for admission before applying for the Entrance Test."
On the basis of the above note, it was submitted that responsibility was cast on the candidates as well to go through the eligibility conditions carefully and make sure about their eligibility before applying for the test.
He further pointed out that the admission of all the applicants to the entrance test is always provisional and the verification of the eligibility conditions is to be done by the College concerned at the time of admission to the Course and if it is found that a candidate does not fulfil the eligibility conditions, his candidature is liable to be cancelled and he cannot have any claim whatsoever against the University/College.
5.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties.
I am of the view that this writ petition deserves to succeed.
As observed above, the petitioner had sat in the Entrance Test before her result of B.Com.
was declared by the Delhi University and, therefore, at the time she could not know whether ultimately she would be eligible or not.
Having sat in the entrance test and having passed the same, she submitted to the College Authorities her result of B.Com.
when the same was declared.
It was the duty of the College Authorities at that stage to verify the eligibility of the candidate.
This is also the requirement of the note published in the prospectus which has been re-produced above.
If there is any blame for the wrongful admission of the petitioner it entirely lies on the College Authorities.
The note on which reliance has been placed by the learned counsel for the respondents primarily deals with the stage which is prior to the sitting in the entrance test.
In other words, before a candidate applies for sitting in the entrance test it is he/she who is to make sure regarding his/her eligibility.
Thereafter, the ball is in the court of the College Authorities.
At the behest of repetition, it may be observed that the petitioner did not know regarding her eligibility when she sat in the entrance test as her B.Com.
result had not been declared.
6.
Besides what has been observed above, it cannot be lost sight of that the petitioner continued her studies almost for the full Session and her application form for admission to the B.Ed.
Examination was duly forwarded by the College Authorities to the University.
The motion Bench had allowed the petitioner to take the Examination and in fact on the directions of this Court her result has also been declared and as observed above she is passing in the Ist Division.
In somewhat similar circumstances, the apex Court in Rajendra Prasad Mathur v. Karnataka University and another, AIR 1986 SC 1448 did not cancel the admission of the candidate though it was found by the Court that the College Authorities had been remiss in granting admission to ineligible candidates who were before the Court.
Since they had completed the entire Course the view was taken that the admission be not cancelled at that stage.
7.
It is also not suggested on behalf of the University that the College Authorities had admitted the petitioner malafide or on some other considerations or that the College Authorities had been indulging in such practice earlier also.
8.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is allowed and it is held that the petitioner was entitled to appear in the B.Ed.
Examination, which she has already taken.
The result which has already been declared by the University in pursuance of the order of this Court would be no more provisional and shall be treated as final.
Let the result of the petitioner be now declared on regular basis.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.