JL Gupta, J - This order will dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 18597 of 1991 and 205 of 1992 as a common question of law is involved.
The facts as appearing from Civil Writ Petition No. 18597 of 1991 may be briefly noticed.
2.
The petitioner is a workman.
He avers that he was appointed as a Driver on February 25, 1985.
Vide order dated August 29, 1987 respondent No. 2 terminated his services as a measure of victimisation.
Aggrieved by the order, he served a notice of demand.
However, the State Government vide order dated June 27, 1988 declined to make a reference to the Labour Court.
He approached this court in Civil Writ Petition No. 4835 of 1989.
The writ petition was allowed.
The order of the State Government was set aside.
The appropriate authority was directed to reconsider the matter.
Even on reconsideration, the government of Haryana has reiterated its earlier order.
As a result, the petitioner has approached this court again.
Notice of the petition was given to the respondents.
No written statement has been filed.
3.
A perusal of the impugned order shows that the State Government has declined to make a reference to the Labour Court because "despite repeated letters by the Management, you have not reported for duty."
4.
It is well settled that under Section 10 of the Act, the State Government is merely required to form an opinion as to whether or not an industrial dispute exists or is apprehended.
It cannot go into the merits of the controversy.
It cannot adjudicate upon the dispute.
It is correct that the State Government has not to refer every frivolous dispute to the Labour Court.
It is also true that the appropriate Government is not expected to refer every dispute mechanically to the Labour Court.
However, once the State Government finds that a dispute exists, it cannot go into the merits of the dispute.
It cannot determine the validity or otherwise of the claim made by the workman.
In the present case, the State Government has declined to make a reference because it formed an opinion that the petitioner workman had failed to report for duty in spite of repeated letters.
This was clearly an adjudication.
The Government acted beyond the scope of its jurisdiction.
5.
Vide order dated June 27, 1988, the State Government had declined the petitioner's request for making a reference to the Labour Court.
This order was set aside by a Division Bench of this Court.
It was clearly held that the State Government had gone into the merits of the case, which it could not have done.
The mistake has been repealed by the State.
This was not fair.
6.
At the hearing, no one has appeared on behalf of the Government to justify its action.
7.
Keeping in view the totality of circumstances, both the writ petitions are allowed.
The impugned order is set aside.
Respondent No. 1 is directed to make a reference to the Labour Court.
It should also pay the petitioner his costs, which are assessed at Rs. 500/-.
Petition allowed.