VK Bali, J - Petitioner who was found guilty for having embezzled an amount of Rs. 2250 by charging the fare from the passengers travelling in the bus conducted by him without issuing them the tickets, in the departmental enquiry unsuccessfully challenged the same before the Labour Court after seeking a reference for adjudication of the dispute under Section 10(1) (c) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
He, thus, seeks a writ in the nature of certiorari to quash the award rendered by the Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Union Territory, Chandigarh with an obvious prayer to grant him all consequential benefits that would naturally flow if he is reinstated.
2.
The facts of the case reveal that the General Manager vide orders dated 3.11.1980 terminated the services of the petitioner after a regular departmental enquiry was held against him.
The charge proved against him was that on checking of the bus as Talwara which was being conducted by him on 28.4.1980 on Mukerian-Chandigarh route by three Inspectors of the Central Flying Squad namely Sarvshri Ramji Dass, Bal Kishan and Swaran Singh.
It was found that he had collected Rs. 2250P from 15 passengers who had boarded the bus from Mukerian and were to go to Talwara but had not issued tickets to them.
The petitioner sought reference under section 10(1) (c) of the Industrial Disputes Act with the result as indicated above.
3.
The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner contends that the workman was entitled to the assistance of a co-workman as envisaged under the provisions of Rule 8.8 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules and the same having been denied to him, renders his discharge from the service as wholly illegal as the enquiry stood vitiated for non-observance of the Rule aforesaid as also the principle of natural justice.
For his aforestated stand, reliance has been placed upon judgment of the Apex Court in "C.L.
Subramaniam v. Collector of Customs, Cochin, AIR 1972 Supreme Court 2178 as also Kshetra Mohan Nath v. District Controller of Stores, E.Railway Halishahar", 1970 Lab.I.C.
389.
In the petition in paragraph 8(g), it has been pleaded that "even before the start of the enquiry the petitioner had requested the Enquiry Officer to procure the assistance of the co-worker as requested by him which was not heeded to and on the next date of enquiry i.e. 21780 even before the start of the enquiry, the petitioner had given in writing that his co-worker had not been called."
The proceedings of 2171980 have been reproduced which read as under :-  "Today on 21780, Shri Bal Kishan Inspector, Shri Ram Dass, Inspector, Divisional Manager Office, Chandigarh and Shri Kirpal Singh C/104 are present for the purpose of departmental enquiry."
Sd/-Inquiry Officer (Supdt).
21780.
Sir,  My co-worker has not been called.
The enquiry be held after he is called.
Sd/- Kirpal Singh  C-104"  4.
In the corresponding para of the reply, it has been mentioned that the petitioner was never debarred from taking the help of co-worker but it was not the duty of the Enquiry Officer to summon the said co-worker for his assistance.
On the records of this case is also available Annexure P1 which is an order of appointing the Enquiry Officer under Rule 8 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules (Punishment and Appeals) to enquire into the charges levelled against the workman.
It appears that when the petitioner received the aforesaid order informing him that the Enquiry Officer has been appointed, he appended a note and claimed help of a co-worker in the domestic enquiry.
He also named Nasib Singh who should be permitted to represent him.
On this scanty material available on the records of the case, it cannot be spelled out that the workman was denied the assistance of a co-workman.
In so far as pleadings in the petition as reproduced above are concerned, suffice it to say that when Bal Kishan Inspector and others were present, the petitioner had requested that his co-workman should be called.
In fact, from the aforesaid requests of the workman, it rather appears that he was provided with the assistance of a co-workman and the same was not denied to him as now sought to be made out by the learned counsel appearing for him.
It is one thing to say that the assistance of a co-workman was denied and altogether different thing to say that the co-workman be called and the enquiry may be ensued only thereafter.
Further, this point was not raised before the Labour Court.
While dealing with issue No. 1 which is with regard to enquiry being proper or vitiated for some reason, it has been held that the workman in fact in his statement did not make any grievance with regard to the conduct of enquiry nor did he say anything which could possible suggest that he was not allowed fair and reasonable opportunity either to cross-examine the witnesses who appeared against him or in leading defence to prove his own case.
If this point was taken in the pleadings before the Labour Court and evidence was led, it was possible for the management to rebut the same and prove that in fact assistance of a co-workman was never denied to the petitioner and that the presence of the co-workman was not to be secured by it.
In view of the fact that this matter was not agitated before the Labour Court and in fact no question whatsoever was raised against the conduct of the enquiry, it shall not be just and equitable at this stage to go into this point and set aside the order of dismissal of petitioner from service.
5.
The next point raised by the learned counsel based on Full Bench Judgment of this court in The State of Haryana v. Ram Chander, AIR 1976 Punjab and Haryana 381 is that the passengers who had boarded the bus and were not issued the tickets as alleged against the petitioner were admittedly not examined before the Enquiry Officer and the evidence of the Inspectors alone was not enough to prove the charges levelled against him.
The evidence of Inspector is said to be hear-say evidence and, therefore, inadmissible and unreliable.
I am afraid this contention of the learned counsel on the basis of law laid down in State of Haryana and another v. Rattan Singh, 1977 PLR 492; and Sarup Singh, Ex-conductor v. State of Punjab, 1989(7) SLR 328 has to be repelled.
6.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition which is devoid of merit is dismissed.
However, in the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.