AL Bahri, J (Oral) - This is a Second Appeal by plaintiff Brij Mohan, whose suit was dismissed by the Courts below.
The plaintiff after due process of selection was appointed as a Clerk on January 27, 1956.
He joined on February 1, 1956.
Within three months he was required to pass the typing test.
He did so.
The test was in fact held on July 7, 1956.
On July 4, 1964, he was promoted as Sub Divisional Clerk.
He joined on that post on July 22, 1964.
His services were terminated on February 23, 1968, although order of termination is dated January 19, 1968 and this order was challenged in the suit.
2.
Before I refer to the pleadings in detail, suffice it to say that after issues were framed and reframed, the case was listed for plaintiff's evidence and adjourned twice on receipt of telegrams about his illness.
On first occasion adjournment was allowed subject to payment of Rs. 20/- as costs and on second occasion adjournment was allowed subject to payment of Rs. 40/- as costs.
Ultimately when the plaintiff appeared in courts, his statement was recorded with regard to payment of costs on November 15, 1973 which date was fixed in his absence, on payment of Rs. 40/- as costs (This statement is at page 307 of the trial Court record).
The plaintiff stated therein that no witness was brought and none was summoned.
He was not prepared to pay the costs.
He had separately filed an application with respect to payment of costs that he would produce Medical Certificate.
The trial Court proceed under Order 17 Rule 3 of the Code of Civil Procedure to decide the suit and ultimately dismissed the same giving decision issue-wise for want of evidence.
His appeal, as already stated above, was dismissed by the Additional District Judge.
3.
Order 17 Rule 3 of the Code of Civil Procedure which requires consideration reads as under :-  " Court may proceed notwithstanding either party fails to produce evidence, etc-  Where any party to a suit to whom time has been granted fails to produce his evidence, or to cause the attendance of his witnesses, or to perform any other act necessary to the further progress of the suit, for which time has been allowed, (the Court may, notwithstanding such default), -  (a) if the parties are present, proceed to decide the suit forthwith; or  (b) if the parties are, or any of them is absent, proceed under Rule 2)."
Under the aforesaid provision, the Court could proceed to decide the suit forthwith on failure of the party/plaintiff to produce evidence, as is the position in the present case.
This appeal is decided taking order of the trial Court to be correct that it could proceed to decide the suit as the plaintiff inspite of two adjournments granted on payment of costs failed to pay costs, when appeared did not produce any evidence.
The rule aforesaid does not lay down that every suit is to be dismissed while taking resort to the aforesaid provision even if no evidence has been produced by the plaintiff on the issues framed.
4.
The object of framing issues arising out of the pleadings of the parties is to formulate such questions on which decision is required and if evidence is required to be led on such issues or questions, the parties are to be afforded opportunity in that respect.
If the pleas of the plaintiff on material facts are admitted in the written statement or are not specifically denied, they are to be deemed to have been admitted, even if issues on such pleadings are framed, such issues could be decided on the admitted pleas without there being any other evidence.
This is, what was required to be done by the trial court while acting under Order 17 Rule 3 of the Code of Civil Procedure in this case, to refer to the pleadings and to dispose of the issues framed in the case and not simply to hold that the issues framed were not proved for non- production of any evidence.
The following issues framed by the trial Court (As recasted) :-  1.
Whether the plaintiff was working against a permanent post at the time of termination of his services and after the expiry of the period of probation he became a permanent employee, as alleged ?
2.
Whether the order dated 19-1-1968 terminating services of the plaintiff is illegal, ultra vires and not binding on the plaintiff for the reasons given in the plaint ?
3.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to Rs. 6,750/- on account of his salary and allowances, as alleged ?
4.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to Rs. 1100/- on account of salary, TA, joining time pay, terminal leave salary, terminal gratuity, refund of C.T.D.
deposits, award for not participating any strike, H/R2 for carriage charges, refund of excess recovery of house rent, reimbursement of medical charges and arrears of increments, as alleged ?
5.
Whether Civil Court has got no jurisdiction to try this suit ?
6.
Whether notice served under Section 80 CPC is invalid as alleged ?
7.
Whether the services of the plaintiff were terminated mala fide and resulted in evil consequences is to the plaintiff as alleged ?
8.
Relief.
5.
The plaintiff in para 1 of the plaint alleged that he had been recruited as Assistant Clerk vide order dated January 27, 1956, and joined on February 1, 1956.
He was promoted as Sub Divisional Clerk vide order dated July 4, 1964, and he continued working as such upto the afternoon of February 23, 1968.
In para 1 of the written statement filed on behalf of the official- respondents, though the allegation as aforesaid was denied, yet the denial was not specific.
It was admitted that the plaintiff was appointed purely on temporary basis and he continued as such upto February 23, 1968.
In para 2 of the plaint, it was pleaded that the post of the plaintiff was on temporary basis, which was made permanent w.e.f.
August 27, 1966 vide order of the Superintending Engineer.
It was admitted in the written statement that the post was made permanent.
However, it was clarified that the incumbent working against that post would not be made permanent.
In para 3 of the plaint, it was alleged that the plaintiff was deemed to be on a confirmed post.
In the written statement, this plea was not specifically denied.
However, it was stated that the interpretation of the plaintiff was not correct.
In para 4 of the plaint, it was stated that the plaintiff was promoted as Sub Divisional Clerk vide order dated July 4, 1964 and the probationary period having already expired he was deemed to have become a permanent hand in the service.
In the written statement, it was stated that the plaintiff was promoted as Sub Divisional Clerk, however, he was placed in the same grade as that of an Assistant Clerk, but carrying a special pay of Rs. 20/- per mensem for carrying the duties of Sub Divisional Clerk.
No probationary period was mentioned in the promotion order.
However, the plaintiff continued to be a temporary hand.
In para 5 of the plaint, it was mentioned that the original salary of the plaintiff on the date of appointment was Rs. 100/- including Dearness Allowance etc and in para 6 it was mentioned that the plaintiff was getting Rs. 205/- per mensum at the date of termination.
The contents of these two paras were not denied in the written statement.
Para 7 of the plaint gives different grounds on which order terminating services of the plaintiff was challenged.
Sub ground (a) mentioned that no departmental enquiry, as required by law was ever held, which was necessary pre-requisite for passing the impugned order.
In the corresponding para of the written statement, it was stated that no departmental enquiry was necessary.
The plaintiff was, however, served with one month's notice as per appointment order.
In sub-para (b) of para 7 of the plaint, it was pleaded that no show cause notice, charge sheet was served upon the plaintiff as required by law.
In the written statement, in corresponding para it was stated that the plaintiff was not entitled to any show cause notice or charge-sheet as he was a temporary hand.
In sub para (c) it was alleged in the plaint that the plaintiff was not supplied with copies of documents used against him and the statement of witnesses, if any, recorded against him.
In corresponding para in the written statement, it was stated that no statement of witness was recorded and as such question of supplying copy thereof did not arise.
In sub-para (d) to para 7 of the plaint, it was alleged that the plaintiff was not afforded reasonable opportunity to defend his case, violating the principles of natural justice.
In the corresponding para in the written statement, it was stated that the plaintiff being a temporary hand, the question of affording a reasonable opportunity did not arise.
The pleas in the replication are not being mentioned as the same merely reiterate the stand taken up in the plaint.
6.
The question for consideration of the pleas aforesaid would be as to whether the order terminating services of the petitioner is valid and in accordance with the Service Rules governing his service.
Since broadly the pleas raised in the plaint were admitted such question could be determined on admitted facts.
7.
The order of termination was passed on January 19, 1968.
The Punjab Public Works Department (Buildings and Road Branch), Chief Engineer's Officer (Class III - Ministerial) Service Rules, 1967 were in force.
Appendix 'A' attached to these rules provides for recruitment of Clerks against a number of posts mentioned therein.
The qualifications for appointment of Clerks are given in Rule 7.
In case of Clerks, appointment could be direct or by promotion from amongst Restorers, Gestetner Operators and Photedars in the service and thirdly, by transfer of an official working on the similar post, either in service of Government of India or of a State Government.
Rule 7, Sub-Clause (4) provides for qualifications in case of appointment by promotion; the minimum qualification is Matriculate and he should have at least three years experience and should qualify a Departmental Test conducted by the Chief Engineer.
Rule 9 provides a period of probation of two years, if recruited by direct appointment and one year, if recruited otherwise.
Sub-Clause (3) added to rule 9 clarifies that on completion of prescribed period of probation, the person would be confirmed if appointed against a permanent post.
8.
The plaintiff, as already stated above, was initially recruited as an Assistant Clerk.
He was promoted as Sub Divisional Clerk w.e.f.
July 4, 1964.
He worked on that post upto February 23, 1968, though he was recruited against a temporary post, but the same was made permanent w.e.f.
August 27, 1966, vide order of the Superintending Engineer dated August 21, 1967.
Thus, on the date order terminating his services was passed, he was working against a permanent post, as per the facts admitted in the written statement, aforesaid, and the plaintiff had also passed the Departmental test.
He had completed the probationary period at the time order termination his services was passed.
Thus, for all intends and purposes, the plaintiff became a permanent employee (Clerk) under the Rules aforesaid.
The order terminating his services would be an order of punishment as the procedure prescribed for removing him from service was not followed, as was required to be done under the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970.
Simple order of termination cannot be sustained in law.
No enquiry was held.
No show cause notice was served upon the plaintiff.
No opportunity of hearing was given to him before order terminating his services was passed.
The order is, therefore, held to be illegal.
Finding on issues No. 1 and 2 by the Courts below, thus, cannot be maintained and the same are reversed.
9.
Findings on issue Nos. 3 and 4 were dependent upon the findings on issue Nos. 1 and 2.
The amount of salary payable to the plaintiff was not denied in the written statement.
Thus, the plaintiff would be entitled to the arrears of salary and the allowance from the date of order terminating his services was passed.
10.
Under issue No. 3 the plaintiff is held entitled to the arrears of pay amounting to Rs. 6750/- as claimed in the plaint.
11.
Under issue No. 4 it is held that the plaintiff would be deemed to continue in service and he will be entitled to all such benefits.
12.
Under issue No. 5 it is held that since the order of termination was served upon the plaintiff at Hissar, the Civil Court at Hissar, therefore, was competent to try the suit.
13.
With respect to issue No. 6, it may be stated that notice under section 80 of the Code of Civil Procedure was alleged to have been served, as mentioned in para 12 of the plaint.
In the written statement, it was simply submitted that there was no cause of action.
There was no specific denial of service of notice under Section 80 o fthe Code of Civil Procedure.
Thus, this issue is decided against the defendants, holding that notice under Section 80 of the Code of Civil Procedure was valid.
14.
Under issue No. 7 obviously no finding could be recorded that the order terminating services of the plaintiff was passed mala fide, because the same required evidence to be produced by the plaintiff.
To that extent the issue could be decided against the plaintiff.
However, the order visited evil consequences to the plaintiff.
It did not require any evidence to be led as under the law simple order of termination of services in case of a permanent employee would amount to punishment.
This issue is decided accordingly.
For the reasons recorded above, this appeal is allowed with costs.
Judgments and decrees of the Courts below are set aside and the suit filed by the plaintiff stands decreed, holding the order of termination of his services to be illegal and the plaintiff entitled to the arrears of pay and allowances to the extent of Rs. 6750/- as claimed, towards back salary and allowances upto the date of filing of the suit.
Appeal allowed.