VK Bali, J (Oral) - This order will dispose of Civil Writ Petition No. 11419 of 1989 and Civil Writ Petition No. 3278 of.
1988 as common question of fact and law are involved in both the petitions.
Brief facts have, however, been extracted from Civil Writ Petition No. 11419 of 1989, "Sudarshan Kumar v. Managing Committee and others."
2.
Petitioner seeks issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari so as to quash Annexure P-5 vide which grant-in-aid under Delhi Pattern was stopped for the post of Art and Craft Teacher of KK High School payable to her.
Petitioner passed Matriculation examination from Punjab School Education Board in the year 1973.
She obtained two years certificate of Arts and Craft Teachers Training Course from the Department of Industrial Training Directorate of Industrial Training Haryana in examination held in April 1982.
The District Education Officer advertised the post of Art and Craft Teacher.
The petitioner was one of the persons who applied for the post aforesaid.
In the interview held by the Managing Committee petitioner was selected and she joined her duty on 191987 on the basis of appointment letter issued by the Managing Committee.
The petitioner is governed by the Punjab Privately-Managed Recognised Schools Employees (Security of Service Rules), 1981 and as per the Rules aforesaid the qualification of Art and Craft Teacher is Matric with two years diploma of Art and Craft approved by the Industrial Training Organisation.
The District Education Officer, Patiala granted approval to the appointment of petitioner vide letter dated 1531988 : On account of satisfactory record of the petitioner, the Principal, KK High School, Patiala recommended her case for confirmation and the matter was placed before the Managing Committee of the School in the meeting held on 30101988.
The Managing Committee confirmed the petitioner after one year from the date she had completed the period of probation.
The petitioner continued working as Art and Craft Teacher and was paid her salary on receipt of grant-in-aid to the extent of 95% against her post but the District Education Officer vide letter dated 1661989 decided to withdraw the approval and discontinued payment of grant-in-aid to the post of Art and Craft Teacher to KK High School on the ground that the certificate of two years Art and Craft Teacher Training Course issued by the Director of Industrial Training Department, Haryana has been de-recognised by the Director Education Department (Schools, Punjab vide letter dated 2091985.
3.
The precise controversy that has been raised in the present case came up for adjudication before a Full Bench of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 13174 of 1991 and this is how the matter was dealt with the operative part of the judgment -  "Although in the present case it was not disputed that the Haryana Government had issued the Diploma Certificate in final Arts and Crafts Teacher Training Examination, to be more sure.
We called upon both the parties to produce the Diploma Certificate produced by the petitioner before the State seeking appointment.
The petitioner has produced photo-copy of such certificate and she also procured a photo-copy of the Examination Roll of all the candidates from the department of Industrial Training Haryana.
It is now quite clear that the certificate was issued by the Comptroller of Examinations, Department of Industrial Training, Haryana, in favour of petitioner Smt. Neelam Kumari, daughter of Parshotam Singh, having passed final Arts and Crafts Teachers Examination, 1981 and Annexure P-1 produced in the case another certificate issued from Arya High and Training Schools, Gohana, that this Course taken by the petitioner was of two years session 1979-81.
The name of this Institution is also mentioned in the certificate issued by the Comptroller of Examinations' Department of Industrial Training, Haryana.
In view of the instructions Annexure P-16, this Certificate of training taken in Haryana stood recognised by the State of Punjab.
When the petitioner completed this course and applied for job, such certificates were recognised by the State of Punjab and if subsequently the State of Punjab decided to de-recognise such certificates, the same would be prospectively and will not apply retrospectively."
4.
The position is not different in the present case.
When the petitioner joined the post the same was recognised by the Government of Haryana.
For the reasons recorded in the aforesaid Civil Writ Petition No. 13174 of 1991 decided on September 24, 1992, this petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to release the grant-in-aid to the extent of 95% to the post which the petitioner is holding.
The arrears be paid to her forthwith.
5.
In Civil Writ Petition No. 3278 of 1988, it is ordered that the services of the petitioners would be regularised with effect from 141985, in accordance with Annexure P-2.
Petition allowed.