NK Kapoor, J - This is plaintiff's Regular Second Appeal against the judgment and decree of the Additional District Judge, Chandigarh dated 1921990 whereby the appeal filed by the defendant against the judgment and decree of trial Court dated 1991986 was accepted thereby dismissing the suit of the plaintiff.
Briefly put plaintiff filed a suit for permanent injunction restraining the defendant from interfering in the performance of duties of the plaintiff as Imam of Jama Masjid, Sector 20, Chandigarh and to remove him forcibly from Jama Masjid.
As per averment made in the plaint, it was stated that plaintiff is a permanent and confirmed employee of the Punjab Wakf Board-defendent No. 1.
Punjab Wakf Board is a statutory body and the provisions of Punjab Wakf Act, 1954 are applicable.
This board was superseded by the Central Govt. and defendant No. 2 Shri Naseem Ahmed had been made Administrator of the Punjab Wakf Board.
Defendant Nos. 3 and 4 were impleaded as parties for the reason that defendant No. 3 then was Minister Incharge of the Wakf Board whereas defendant No. 4 was a State Minister in the State of Haryana.
It was further alleged that the abovesaid persons wielded influence and were infact instrumental in creating interference in the due performance of the duties of the plaintiff.
It was further stated that defendant No. 1 issued an order dated 7.7.1984 putting restriction to be imposed on the collection of donation inside Jama Masjid, Chandigarh.
This order was got affixed on the Notice Board of the Jama Masjid which somehow annoyed defendant Nos. 4 and 5 who thus threatened plaintiff that he would be removed from his present office at Jama Masjid by next Friday.
Alongwith this suit, plaintiff filed an application under Order 39 Rules 1 and 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure seeking an injunction against the defendant restraining them from interfering in the working of the plaintiff or removing him forcibly.
2.
The Court after considering the averments made in the plaint and the other documents placed on record prima facie came to the conclusion that the plaint raises triable issues.
Accordingly, the court has restrained defendant No. 2 from forcibly removing the plaintiff from the post of Imam except in accordance with the procedure prescribed vide order dated 2371984.
3.
It so happened that despite the stay order granted by the court as stated above, was violated thereby impelling the plaintiff to file contempt petition in the court.
In the meantime, the plaintiff was informed that he has been transferred from the post of Imam at Chandigarh as Imam of Ambala tegraphically and accordingly, plaintiff sought amendment of the plaint vide application dated 821985.
This application was granted by the court and amended plaint was taken on record.
4 It may be mentioned here that name of defendant No. 3 was deleted by the order of the court.
Defendants put in appearance, filed written statement and controverted the various averments made in the plaint.
By way of preliminary objections, it was stated that the present suit is not maintainable in view of bar of Section 56 of the Wakf Act, 1954 which envisaged issuance of a notice before such a suit is filed.
Other objections like misjoinder of parties and causes of actions, no cause of action accrues against the defendants and that the plaintiff has not come with the clean hand as he has not disclosed full facts.
It was also specifically stated that plaintiff was ordered to be transferred and vacate the accommodation but the plaintiff has not complied with that order.
On the pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed :  1.
Whether notice U/S 56 of the Wakf Board Act is mandatory ?
OPD.
2.
If issue No. 1 is proved whether the plaintiff has served valid notice upon defendants under Section 56 of the Wakf Board Act ?
If not, to what effect ?
3.
Whether the suit is bad for misjoinder of parties.
4.
Whether the plaint has not been properly verified ?
OPD.
5.
Whether the plaintiff has no cause of action ?
6.
Whether the orders of transfers of the plaintiff as Imam of Jama Masjid, Sector 20, Chandigarh to some other place are mala fide ?
OPP.
7.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled for the injunction prayed for ?
OPP.
8.
Relief  5.
Trial Court took up issue No. 6 first i.e. as to whether the order of transfer of the plaintiff as Imam of Jama Masjid to some other place is mala fide.
Court referred to the appointment letter dated 5101983 Ex.P-1 and thereafter, agreeing with the contention of the plaintiff's counsel that it is only the Board which is entitled to transfer the plaintiff's, held the transfer made by the Secretary to be without any authority.
It was further held that as per appointment letter Ex.P-1, the plaintiff was not liable to be transferred to any other place.
However, examining from another angle, the court observed that even if it is assumed for the sake of argument that the post of the plaintiff was transferable, his transfer from Chandigarh to Ambala was clearly a case of mala fide.
This way it was held that order of transfer dated 2371984 Ex.P-12 was illegal, without jurisdiction and mala fide and so decided this issue in favour of the plaintiff.
Under issue No.1, it was held that provisions of Section 56 of Punjab Wakf Board Act are not applicable on the facts of the present case as the impugned order of transfer cannot be said to have been passed under the Act, as secondly, had no right to do so.
This issue was thus decided in favour of the plaintiff.
In view of the finding on issue 1, issue No. 2 was treated as redundant.
Under issue Nos. 3 and 5, it was held that suit is not bad for misjoinder of parties or that no cause of action accrues to the plaintiff.
Since no arguments were raised in respect of issue No. 4, the same was decided against the defendant.
Under issue No. 7, it was held that plaintiff is entitled to injunction restraining the defendant from interfering in the performance of the duties of plaintiff as Imam of Jama Masjid.
Resultantly, the suit of the plaintiff was decreed.
6.
The lower Appellate Court re-examined the matter on facts and law.
The lower Appellate Court while referring to the earlier history of the case i.e. when the plaintiff was earlier appointed as Imam and had been posted/transferred at various places, in Punjab, Haryana and Himachal Pradesh formed a view that in fact the plaintiff was appointed in lieu of his earlier appointment and this way he could not make any grievance on account of the mere order of transfer which is quite natural in the nature of the job.
Lower Appellate Court thus observed that the trial Court considered the letter Ex.P-1 in isolation.
Relying upon the judgments cited by the counsel for the appellant i.e. 1973 (2) SLR 659 Prem Parveen v. Union of India and ors. and 1981 (3) SLR 215 Shanti Kumari v. Regional Deputy Director, Health Services, Patna and others, which were for the preposition that "where transfer of an employee is made in the exigency of the service, the opinion of the Government in that regard is a subjective satisfaction and the court is not competent to judge the propriety or sufficiency of such opinion by objective standard" and other submissions of the counsel, held that the transfer order (Ex1/D12) cannot be said to be mala fide by any stretch of imagination.
In view of the fact, that plaintiff applied for the post of Imam vide Ex.D-7 and in pursuance of which appointment letter Ex.P-l was issued, it ought to have been construed that it is not a case of fresh appointment.
This way the court reversed the decision of the trial Court under Issue No. 6.
Similarly, the lower Appellate Court reversed the finding of issue No. 1 and held that the suit is not maintainable in view of bar of section 56 of the Wakf Board Act, 1954, since no notice was issued before filing the suit.
The suit was held to be pre-mature for want of notice issue No. 2.
Findings on issue Nos. 3, 4 and 5 were however affirmed and findings on issue No. 7 were also reversed in view of findings on issue Nos. 1 and 6.
7.
The learned counsel for the appellant has assailed the judgment and decree of the Additional District Judge on the ground that the same is vitiated, as the court has misread the appointment letter and other material which clearly bring out the falsity of the claim of the defendants.
Elaborating further counsel of the appellant to the appointment letter Ex.P-1 and drew pointed attention to the fact that plaintiff was appointed by the Administration vide order dated 1101983.
A perusal of this order would clearly reveal that the plaintiff was appointed as Imam of Jama Masjid, Chandigarh.
Relying to Ex.D-II, vide which he was asked to vacate the premises in his occupation at Chandigarh and further take charge as of Ambala Cantt, the same must said to be without authority as according to the plaintiff, the Secretary of the Board had no authority to issue such like order.
Counsel for the defendant however in support of the order of transfer has urged that the order of transfer has been passed under the Wakf Act.
Since no notice had been issued before filing the suit as envisaged by Section 56 of the Wakf Board Act, 1954, the suit was wholly incompetent and this way suit had rightly been dismissed by the court below.
Relying upon regulation No. 24 made under Wakf Act of 1954 urged that the order passed by the Secretary is in pursuance of the provisions of this Act.
At best it should be construed having been passed at the behest of the Chairman.
In addition thereto, the counsel for the defendant urged that the transfer is in the exigency of the service and for which the court is not competent to examine the propriety of such an order.
In support of his above contention, counsel relied upon the judgment cited by the court below (reference to which has been made earlier in the part of this judgment).
8.
The crux of the dispute, pertains to determination of real import of appointment letter Ex.P-1 and the transfer made by the Secretary, Ex.D.II.
A bare perusal of Ex.P-1 reveals that plaintiff was appointed vide order of the Administration dated 1101983 as Imam of Jama Masjid, Chandigarh on a monthly pay of Rs. 270/-.
Consequently, he joined as Imam of Jama Masjid, Chandigarh, and continued to perform his duties without any interruption till the impugned order of transfer.
As per Exhibit P-1, there is no mendon that the plaintiff is liable to be transferred.
The contention of the defendant that, in fact, this appointment Exhibit P-1 was in continuation of his earlier appointment sometime in the year 1983 is in fact not borne out from Exhibit P-1.
There is no denying the fact that the plaintiff vide his application for seeking appointment as Imam had expressed his willingness to be appointed as Imam of Chandigarh or of any other place under the jurisdiction of defendant No. 1, but all the same it cannot be so construed as to give a right to the Wakf Board to transfer the plaintiff.
Accordingly, reference made by the defendant counsel with regard to application of the plaintiff Exhibit P-7 and other documents relating to his earlier appointment and the factum of having been transferred from one place to another earlier does not in any way advance the case of the plaintiff in the light of letter of appointment Exhibit P-1.
9.
Even if it is taken that the Wakf Board had a right to transfer an Imam of a particular place to another place under its jurisdiction in view of some alleged complaints filed against him, yet such an order could only be passed by a competent authority.
According to the plaintiff, Secretary of the Punjab Wakf Board has got no such authority as he is not "the appointing authority of the plaintiff.
10.
The defendants, however, have taken support from Regulation 24 published in the Govt. Gazette notification exercising powers under section 61 of the Wakf Board Act, 1954.
The relevant Regulation reads as under :  "24.
Appointing authority - Section 68(2)(e) - (1) Appointments to posts under the Board shall be made by the authorities specified below :  Posts Appointing Authority.
Class I Chairman.
Class II Secretary with the approval of the Chairman.
Class III Secretary.
(2) All appointments to be made by the Chairman shall be on the recommendation of a Selection Committee appointed by the Board which shall consist of the Chairman and two members.
(3) All orders of posting and transfers of Class I employees shall be made by the Chairman and those of Class II by the Secretary with the approval of the Chairman and of Class III by the Secretary."
A perusal of the same clearly reveals that in case of Class I post, the appointing authority is the Chairman, whereas in case of Class II it is Secretary with the approval of the Chairman and it is only in case of Class III employees that appointment to such posts can be made by the Secretary.
It is also specifically mentioned that all orders of posting and transfers of Class I employees are to be made by the Chairman and those of Class II by the Secretary with the approval of the Chairman and Class III by the Secretary.
Admittedly, the posting of Imam at Chandigarh does not fall within Class III which necessarily implies that such a person could be transferred by the Chairman or by the Secretary with the approval of Chairman in case of Class I and Class II respectively.
Plaintiff's appointment has been made by the Administrator which itself implies that he could be transferred by the Chairman or by the Secretary with the approval of the Chairman.
This way too the order of transferring the plaintiff is without jurisdiction and thus un-sustainable in law.
In view of these findings, it would be no use dilating upon the mala fide action of the defendant which otherwise is quite obvious.
I also do not find any merit in the contention of the counsel for the defendants that such suit could not be filed without complying with the provisions of Section 56 of the Wakf Act, 1954.
Section 56 of the Act reads as under :-  "Notice of suits by parties against the Board - No suit shall be instituted against the Board in respect of any act purporting to be done by it in pursuance of this Act or any rules made thereunder, until the expiration of two months next after notice in writing has been delivered to or left at, the office of the Board, stating the cause of action, the name, description and place of residence of the plaintiff and the relief which he claims; and the plaint shall contain a statement that such notice has been so delivered or left."
There is no denying the fact that no suit is to be in respect of any act instituted against the Board purporting to be done by it in pursuance of this Act or of any rules made thereunder, until the expiration of two months next after notice in writing has been delivered ...  11.
It is to be seen whether the impugned order passed by the Secretary can be said to have been passed in pursuance to the provisions of the Act or Regulations framed under it.
As discussed above, Regulation 24 authorises the Chairman in the case of Class I, Secretary with the approval of Chairman in respect of Class II and Secretary in respect of Class III employees with regard to their posting and transfer.
It is not the stand of the defendant that the Secretary conveyed this order Exhibit P-1 at the behest of the Chairman/Administrator.
This way it cannot be construed that this action of the Secretary in ordering transfer is in pursuance of the provisions of the Wakf Act or Regulations framed thereunder.
Mere assertion of the defendant that since Secretary too is an officer of the Board, the same necessarily implies that the act performed by him was in discharge of his official capacity would not be valid and proper approach.
The lower appellant Court has, in fact, erred in law in not properly construing the appointment Exhibit P-1 and Regulation 24 referred to above.
Notice as envisaged by Section 56 of the Act is mandatory only when it is in respect of any act purportedly done by such public officer in his official capacity.
In case the act is not one purportedly to be done by the officer i.e. to say there must be some nexus between the right of the authority passing the order and his control over service of the plaintiff.
In view of this, I reverse the finding of the lower appellate Court under issue No. 1 as well.
Resultantly, the finding under issue No. 2 also stands reversed.
Consequently, the judgment and decree of the Additional District Judge is set aside and that of the trial Court is affirmed, and the appeal is consequently accepted.
The parties will, however, bear their own costs.
Appeal accepted.