NK Kapoor, J - Suit of the plaintiff was dismissed by the trial Court and the appeal met the same fact.
Hence, this Regular Second Appeal.
2.
Plaintiff filed suit for declaration to the effect that promotions of defendant Nos. 3 to 6 as Chief Inspectors and Station Supervisors prior to his promotion are illegal and contrary to law and so do not bind his rights.
The plaintiff accordingly prayed that the impugned orders, vide which the defendant Nos. 3 to 6 have been promoted be set aside and the plaintiff be considered senior to the defendants and promoted as per his seniority.
Plaintiff, further sought relief restraining defendant Nos. 1 and 2 from further promoting defendant Nos. 3 to 6.
3.
The facts as stated in the plaint are :-  Baner Singh plaintiff was appointed as Inspector, vide order of the Provincial Transport Controller, Haryana dated November 30, 1967.
He joined his service on December 4, 1967 at Rohtak.
As per averments made in the plaint his work and conduct remained good throughout and as a result of which he was promoted as Chief Inspector by the State Transport Controller, Haryana on August 20, 1980.
There has been no complaint regarding honesty, integrity and efficiency.
It is further stated that he crossed the efficiency bar, vide order of the State Transport Controller dated February 25, 1979 and thereafter was given another jump in his pay w.e.f.
April 1, 1982 vide order of the Joint State Transport Controller dated November 5, 1982.
It is further the case of the plaintiff that he is senior in the list of Inspector vis-a-vis defendant No. 3 to 6, i.e., whereas he is shown at serial No. 41, Banarsi Das, Gopi Chand, Chuni Ram and Sardara Ram - defendants are shown at serial Nos. 42, 43, 45 and 49, respectively.
This way, the promotion of Banarsi Dass and Chuni Ram defendant Nos3 and 5 vide order dated March 30, 1979 of Sardara Ram defendant No. 6 vide order dated November 9, 1979 and of Gopi Ram defendant No. 4 vide order dated September 3, 1983 (which is in view of decree passed by the Civil court on March 30, 1983) was ordered.
It is further stated that defendant Nos. 3 and 4 namely, Banarsi Dass and Gopi Chand have further been promoted to the post of Station Supervisors by the order of the State Transport Controller.
Since, no show-cause notice was issued to him before he was superseded, the promotions so made are per se illegal.
4.
Defendants put in appearance and filed written statement making averments to the effect that claim of the plaintiff for promotion was considered but in view of his poor record of service, the same was ignored by the authorities.
It was further alleged that the reports of the plaintiff during the past ten years were not even 50% good and this way he was rightly ignored.
As regards the promotion of defendants Nos. 3 and 4, it was stated that since both of them were promoted as Chief Inspector earlier to the promotion given to the plaintiff, they automatically became senior among the list of Chief Inspectors and thus their promotion as Station Supervisor was perfectly just and according to rules.
Defendants further raised objections with regard to maintainability of the suit.
Jurisdiction of the civil court, suit being not within limitation, etc.  5.
On the pleadings of the parties, following issues were framed :  1.
Whether the orders dated 3031979, 9.11.1979 and 391983 of the S.T.C.
promoting defendant Nos. 3 to 6 as Chief Inspectors superseding and ignoring the plaintiff, are illegal, void and not binding on the rights of the plaintiff ?
if so, its effect ?
OPP.
2.
Whether orders dated 891983 and 2111983 of the S.T.C.
promoting the defendant Nos. 3 and 4 Station Supervisor superseding and ignoring the plaintiff are illegal, void and not binding on the rights of plaintiff ?
If so, its effect ?
OPP.
3.
Whether suit is not maintainable in the present form ?
OPD.
4.
Whether suit is barred by time ?
if so, its effect ?
OPD.
5.
Whether proper court fee has not been paid ?
OPD.
6.
Whether civil court has got no jurisdiction ?
OPD.
7.
Whether plaintiff has got no cause of action ?
OPD.
8.
Relief.
6.
The trial Court, on perusal of oarl as well as documentary evidence and after hearing counsel for the parties found no substance in any of the submission of the plaintiff and consequently dismissed his suit, vide judgment and decree dated November 17, 1987.
Trial Court vide judgment and decree, decided issue Nos. 1, 2 and 3 against the plaintiff.
Issue Nos. 4 and 5 were not pressed before him.
Issue No. 6 was decided against the defendant while issue No. 7 was found against the plaintiff.
7.
Lower appellate Court once again examined the matter on facts as well as on law.
Much emphasis was laid by the learned counsel for the appellant that average reports regarding work and conduct for different years cannot be treated as adverse entries because such annual confidential reports were not to be treated as adverse remarks and for this reliance was placed upon the letter of Punjab Government dated 11.7.1961 wherein it is mentioned that no notice should be taken of the adverse remarks if the same have not been conveyed.
Despite having come to this conclusion, appellate Court, however, declined to interfere with the impugned orders dated March 30, 1979, November 9, 1979 and September 3, 1983 as the copies of the same had not been placed by the plaintiff/appellant on record.
As regards, promotion of defendant Nos. 3 and 4 as Station Supervisor, it was held by the lower appellate court that since the defendants were senior to the plaintiff and having been promoted as Chief Inspectors prior to the plaintiff, the defendants were rightly promoted, as Station Supervisors.
However, it was observed that even these orders of promotion dated September 8, 1983 and November 2, 1983 have not been placed on record.
8.
Under issue No. 4, the court came to the conclusion that impugned orders dated March 30, 1979 and November 9, 1979 were beyond period of limitation as the suit admittedly was filed on February 10, 1984.
Thus in view of the above-mentioned findings, the Additional District Judge found no force in the appeal and consequently dismissed the same vide judgment and decree dated February 9, 1989.
9.
The first submission of the learned counsel for the appellant is that the lower appellate court erred in law in not examining the validity of the impugned orders primarily on the ground that the copies of the same have not been placed on record.
This approach of the lower appellate Court according to the learned counsel, is per se wrong and runs contrary to section 58 of the Indian Evidence Act.
Elaborating, he urged that since these facts have been admitted by the defendants, placing of the copies of the impugned orders would be merely burdening the file.
In any case, it is an admitted case of the parties that vide impugned order dated March 30, 1979, November 9, 1979 and September 3, 1983, defendant Nos. 1 and 2 promoted defendant Nos. 3 to 6 as Chief Inspectors whereby the claim of the plaintiff was ignored.
Both the courts after examining the matter in all its details, have decided these issues, namely, issue Nos. 1 and 2 against the plaintiff.
Thus the sole point which needs slightly more close examination is as to whether defendant Nos. 1 and 2 were justified in ignoring the claim of the plaintiff at the time when defendant Nos. 3 to 6 were promoted or not.
As per statement of Vasudev, PW 2, the name of the plaintiff was duly considered for promotion to the post of Chief Inspector but he was ignored because of his poor service record.
As has come on record, the work of the plaintiff was found to be poor till the end of the year 1974-75.
It is in the light of these circumstances that his case was considered but ignored by the authorities when the promotion was given to defendant Nos3 to 6 in the year 1979.
Thus the assertion of the plaintiff that he was not even considered has been factually found to be wrong.
This being the position the orders dated March 30, 1979 and November 9, 1979 passed by the authorities cannot be termed to be illegal or contrary to rules.
Even the promotion of defendant No. 4 Gopi Chand is in view of the decree of the Civil Court dated March 30, 1983 whereby his seniority was fixed prior to that of Chuni Ram and Sardara Ram, i.e., w.e.f.
March 20, 1979.
Since the plaintiff on his own case has been promoted as a Chief Inspector on August 20, 1980, he was rightly placed below the persons who had been promoted earlier to him in the category of Chief Inspector.
Accordingly, the subsequent promotions of defendant Nos. 3 and 4 vide order dated September 8, 1983 and November 2, 1983 as Station Supervisors can also not be termed as illegal or against rules.
10.
Even with regard to limitation for filing the suit, the same is also beyond limitation qua the impugned order dated March 30, 1979 and November 9, 1979 as such orders could be challenged within a period of three years as per Article 113 of the Limitation Act.
The apex Court in State of Punjab and others v. Gurdev Singh etc., 1991(3) SCT 91 (SC) : AIR 1991 SC 2219 has examined this aspect of the matter i.e. whether a suit for declaration that an order of dismissal or termination from service passed against the plaintiff terming this to be wrongful, illegal or ultra vires is to be challenged at any time.
The apex Court has held that aggrieved party has to approach the Court for relief of declaration within the prescribed period of limitation and this way the residuary article 113 of the Limitation Act could govern such-like suits.
Explanation given by the appellant that he learnt about the impugned orders only a year back, i.e., some time in the year 1983, cannot be accepted in view of the specific stand of the answering defendants that his case was considered while ordering promotion of defendant Nos. 3 to 6.
Even as per his own showing he made the representations to the higher authorities for considering his claim and in view of this position the stand now sought to be projected by the appellant is wholly without any basis.
For the aforesaid reasons, the appeal is devoid of merit and the same is dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.