NC Jain, J - The plaintiff who is respondent No. 2 before this court filed a civil suit giving rise to the filing of the present appeal with the averments that he after passing out FSc Medical, passed graduation.
He joined the service in the year 1970 as Wild Life Inspector.
Chanan Singh appellant-defendant No. 2 was only a matriculate and not eligible for promotion as Wild Life Inspector.
Chanan Singh joined as Wild Life Inspector from 18.7.1979 by way of stop-gap arrangement and that there were seven sanctioned posts of Wild Life Inspectors in the Punjab and by the appointment of the plaintiff on 361970 the 7th post was filled up by him.
Chanan Singh on the joining of the plaintiff, instead of being reverted to the post of Wild Life Guard was his substantive post, was adjusted against the post of Farm Manager.
It was further averred that Chanan Singh, and Saudagar Singh defendant Nos. 2 and 3 were granted selection grade as Wild Life Inspectors with effect from 1891980 and 20.4.1982 despite the fact that they were juniors to the plaintiffs.
Not only that, Chanan Singh was promoted as Wild Life Warden on ad hoc basis.
Similarly, defendant No. 3 was also promoted.
On the basis of the aforementioned facts the plaintiff filed a suit seeking declaration that office orders No. 173/CCF, dated 21121981, No. 7/CCF, dated 1941982, No. 7/CCF, dated 641983 issued by the Chief Conservator of Forests, Punjab, Chandigarh, are illegal, void and not binding upon him.
The plaintiff claimed a decree for declaration that he was entitled to be promoted in the selection grade with effect from 18.9.1990 and also as Wild Life Warden with effect from 1941982 with all arrears of pay and allowances, etc.
The claim of the plaintiff was contested by the defendants.
The rival pleas of the parties gave rise for trail to the following issues :  1.
Whether the orders dated 21121981, 19482 and 6.4.83 passed by the Chief Conservator of Forests, Punjab, Chandigarh, are illegal, void, and not binding upon the plaintiff ?
OPP.
2.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled for promotion as Wild Life Warden from 1941982 and selection grade from 18.9.80 ?
OPP.
3.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the injunction prayed for ?
OPP.
4.
Whether the suit is barred by limitation ?
OPD.
5.
Whether the plaintiff has no cause of action ?
OPD.
6.
Whether the suit is bad for non-joinder of necessary parties ?
OPD.
7.
Whether this court has no jurisdiction ?
OPD.
8.
Whether the suit is not properly valued for the purposes of court fee and jurisdiction ?
OPD.
9.
Relief.
Issue Nos. 1 to 3 were decided against the plaintiff whereas Issue Nos. 4 to 8 were decided against the defendants.
The suit of the plaintiff having been dismissed by the trial Court, an appeal was preferred which was disposed of by the Additional District Judge, Sangrur, vide judgment and decree dated March 19, 1991.
No second appeal has been filed by the State of Punjab.
However, defendant Nos. 2 and 3 have preferred this appeal.
2.
Before dealing with the appeal of the defendants, it may be noticed in short that the appellate court has found that the plaintiff was directly appointed as Wild Life Inspector having requisite qualifications for a direct recruit to which reference has been made in the opening part of the judgment in accordance with rule 8 of the Punjab Wild Life Preservation Department Class III Service Rules, 1959 (for short the rules).
It was found that the plaintiff could be appointed as direct recruit in the proportion of 50 : 50 on the basis of rule 9 of the rules.
No force was found in the contention of the plaintiff that defendant Nos. 2 and 3 were not eligible for promotion.
The first appellate court found that no adverse remarks were conveyed to the plaintiff, no record was produced nor any punishment, warning or censure was ever awarded to the plaintiff.
The appellate court on the basis of Exh.P-5 a seniority list prepared on 4670 - found that the plaintiff's name was very much there.
After placing reliance upon the case law that adverse confidential reports could not be acted upon if they are not communicated to the concerned government employee for denying him promotional opportunities, the appellate court set aside the finding of the trial Court to the effect that the plaintiff was not entitled to promotion.
In other words, the plaintiff was held entitled to promotion as mentioned in paragraph 14 of the judgment.
The suit of the plaintiff was decreed.
Against the judgment and decree of the first appellate court the defendant Nos. 2 and 3 have filed the present regular second appeal before this court.
3.
It is clear from the narration of the findings recorded by the appellate Court that defendant Nos. 2 and 3 have not been affected by the judgment and decree of the appellate court.
On the other hand, the argument of the plaintiff against defendant Nos. 2 and 3 was repelled by the appellate Court in so many words by recording the following observations :  "Hence the contention of learned counsel for the appellant that defendant Nos. 2 and 3 are not eligible for promotion being merely matriculates at that time is baseless because as per the rules, the minimum qualification for promotion is matriculate with 10 years experience as Wild Life Guard.
Both defendant Nos. 2 and 3 fulfilled the said qualifications."
In view of the aforementioned situation, this court is of the view that the appellants cannot rake up the issues regarding the relief granted to the plaintiff and their appeal deserves to be dismissed on this ground alone.
Consequently the appeal is dismissed with no costs.
Appeal dismissed.