NK Kapoor, J - This is a defendants Regular Second Appeal.
The suit for declaration is to the effect that order dated 331978, passed by the Managing Director and communicated by District Manager, Punjab State Civil Supplies Corporation Limited, Chandigarh, terminating the services of plaintiff from the post of Shop Assistant is illegal, unconstitutional, mala fide, wanton, null and void, and against the rules of service as well as contrary to the principles of natural justice.
Plaintiff by way of further relief sought full back wages and laid claim for recovery of the amount due and further sought injunction restraining the defendants from recovering any amount from him or his surety.
2.
As per the averments made in the plaint, the plaintiff was appointed as Shop Assistant on 2891977 by the defendants and his services were terminated on 331978.
The plaintiff sought this declaration on the ground that no notice before terminating his services was issued by the defendants.
Even a month's pay in lieu of notice has not been given to him.
3.
The defendants put in appearance, filed written statement and controverted the averments made in the plaint.
The defendants also resisted the claim of the plaintiff on the ground that no notice under section 80 Code of Civil Procedure was given by him before filing the suit and even otherwise the plaintiff is estopped from filing the said suit by his own acts and conduct.
On the pleadings of the parties, various issues were framed by the trial Court, i.e., the suit for mere declaration was not maintainable, validity of notice, bar of the jurisdiction of the civil court, non-joinder and mis-joinder of the parties, suit being defective on account of multifariousness.
However, the main dispute revolves around the termination of plaintiff on issue Nos. 1 and 2, which for facility of reference are hereunder reproduced :-  1.
Whether the order dated 331978 passed by the Managing Director and communicated by the District Manager, is illegal and void as alleged ?
OPP.
2.
Whether the plaintiff is still in service of the defendants and is entitled to full wages and the defendants are not entitled to recover any-amount from him, sought to be recovered by them ?
OPP."
The trial Court, after considering the evidence on record, came to the conclusion that the impugned order was passed by way of punishment as it contained stigma for the work and conduct of the plaintiff besides the order was passed without holding any inquiry and without giving any show-cause notice to the plaintiff.
Under Issue No. 2, it was held that the plaintiff is a government servant and also he can claim other consequential reliefs.
The trial Court, thus, held that the suit of the plaintiff is maintainable in the present circumstances.
Accordingly, the suit of the plaintiff was decreed by a judgment and decree dated 2121980.
4.
The lower Appellate Court again examined the evidence on record in respect of issues Nos. 1 and 2 as both the parties did not assail the findings of the trial Court in respect of other issues.
The Appellate Court primarily relied upon condition (ii) of the appointment letter Ex.P-1 and, thus, held that since admittedly, the plaintiff was neither given one month's notice nor paid one month's salary in lieu of notice, the impugned order Ex.P-3, dated 331978 is illegal and is liable to be set aside.
However, the lower Appellate Court did not agree with the reasoning of the trial Court that the impugned order Ex.P-3 cast stigma against the plaintiff.
Similarly the Appellate Court observed that the observation of the Sub Judge that Ex.P-3 was passed by way of punishment and that no notice was issued as envisaged by appointment letter Ex.P-1, is not maintainable.
The appeal of the defendant was dismissed by judgment and, decree dated 3081982.
5.
The learned counsel for the appellant has assailed this finding of the lower Appellate Court on the ground that the same is not borne out by the evidence on record.
According to the counsel, both the courts have mis-read order of appointment Ex.P-1, which consequently resulted in passing of the decree against the defendant-appellant.
This way the judgments of the courts below are vitiated and liable to be set aside.
Elaborating further, the counsel urged that the lower Appellate Court has erred in law in relying upon clause (ii) of appointment letter Ex.P-1 dated 2891977.
According to him in fact the service of the petitioner, who was on probation, were terminated in terms of clause (iii) of the appointment letter Ex.P-1.
This is clear from mere reading of letter Ex.P-3 dated 331978.
6.
The learned counsel for the respondent, on the other hand, has laid much emphasis to the fact that both the courts have examined the matter on facts, and since no question of law much less a substantial question of law arises on the admitted fact, the same is not amenable to the jurisdiction in view of section 100 of the Civil Procedure Code.
Referring to clause (ii) of appointment order Ex.P-1, the counsel urged that the same envisages one month's notice or payment of pay for the period by which such notice falls short of one month and since, admittedly no notice was issued before terminating the services of the plaintiff nor any amount was paid in lieu thereof, the order Ex.P-3 has rightly been held illegal by the Courts below.
Counsel further argued that clause (ii) of Ex.P-1 is implicit while examining the other clauses of Ex.P-1, in the instant case, clause (iii) i.e., to say that even when a person is relieved on account of his work and conduct being unsatisfactory, yet it is incumbent upon the authorities to give one month's notice or payment of pay in lieu thereof before such order of termination.
7.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the relevant documents on record.
The main controversy revolves around clauses (ii) and (iii) of Ex.P-1, which are hereunder reproduced :  "(ii) His services are liable to be terminated on one month notice or payment of pay for the period by which such notice falls short of one month, should be desired to resign, he will likewise have to give one month's notice or forfeit pay for the period for which the notice falls short of one month.
(iii) He will be on probation for a period of two years in the first instance, which can be further extended from time to time up to a maximum period of three years.
In the event of his work and conduct being found unsatisfactory during the period of probation or during the extended period of probation, his services are liable to be terminated without any notice and/or without assigning any reason."
8.
Admittedly, the plaintiff was appointed vide order dated 2891977, Ex. P-1.
A bare perusal of this order clearly reveals that he was appointed on purely temporary basis.
9.
As per clause (iii) the plaintiff was on probation for a period of two years in the first instance, which can be further extended up to a maximum period of three years.
However, vide clause (iii), it was specifically stipulated that in case his work and conduct was found unsatisfactory during the period of probation or during the extended period of probation, his services were liable to be terminated without any notice and/or without assigning any reason.
Mere look at Ex.P-3 dated 331978, vide which the services of the plaintiff were terminated, refers to clause (iii) of the appointment order dated 2891977, which has been reproduced above.
Termination under clause (iii) does not envisage service of notice before such termination nor of assigning any reason.
However, under clause (iii) the services of a person could be terminated only for the reason that his work and conduct were unsatisfactory.
As per Ex.P-3, it has been specifically mentioned that the work and conduct of the plaintiff has been found unsatisfactory during the period of probation and his services are accordingly terminated in terms of clause (iii) of the appointment order dated 2891977.
This being the factual position, the Courts below have misread Ex.P-1 and Ex.P-3, which consequently vitiated their judgment.
In view of very clear stipulation in clause (iii) of Ex.P-1 that no notice was to be served in case the work and conduct were found to be unsatisfactory, both the courts have indeed erred in relying upon clause (ii) of order Ex.P-1 for holding that one month's notice or pay in lieu thereof was essential before his termination.
There is no denying the fact that the plaintiff was appointed as per terms and conditions duly stipulated in the appointment order Ex.P-1 and as such, the plaintiff is governed by the same.
For the aforesaid reasons, I accept the appeal and set aside the judgment and decree of the courts below.
Resultantly, the suit filed by the plaintiff stands dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Appeal accpted.