B Subhashsan Reddy, J. - Mr. K Harinath the learned standing counsel for APSRTC vehemently contends, that the ratio laid down in the above two Division Benches Judgments is inapplicable to the facts of this case on the ground that Section 2(oo) of the Act has been amended.
But it has to be borne in mind that the provisions of the Act are beneficial in nature to the workmen and that they have to be strictly construed in favour of the workmen.
Further, the provisions are substantive in nature and not procedural.
As such, amendment of section 2(oo) of the Act with effect from 18.8.1984 will not have retrospective operation and as such this case which related to 16.7.1982 has to be dealt with in accordance with the definition as contained earlier to the said he amendment.
In the circumstances, I hold that the two Division Benches Judgments referred to supra squarely cover this case and the Additional Labour Court, Hyderabad had correctly followed the same.
Further, the respondents No. 2 did not challenge the award passed by the Labour Court, even though, the Labour Court has set aside the order passed by the disciplinary authority.
This writ petition is filed challenging the award of the Labour Court ordering appointment of the petitioner afresh by the disciplinary authority removing the petitioner from service was held to be bad following the two Division Benches judgments mentioned supra.
2.
It has to be borne in mind that in view of the conflicting judicial precedents with regard to the power of courts to substitute its own punishment while affirming the finding of the guilt recorded by the disciplinary authority, the Parliament in its wisdom has incorporated section 11-A of the Act by an amendment to clothe the courts to exercise the said powers.
3.
Mr. K Harnath, the learned standing counsel for APSRTC contends that this power under Section 11-A of the Act can be exercised even while setting aside the award passed by the Labour Court.
I am afraid, I cannot accede to this contention as Section 11-A has got no application at all to a case where the order of the disciplinary authority is set aside.
It is only in cases where the order of the disciplinary authority on finding of misconduct is held to be proved.
Section 11-A can be invoked for the purpose of considering the proportion of sentence.
As such, I hold that the Labour Court had exceeded its power in invoking Section 11-A of the Act, even while setting aside the order passed by the disciplinary authority and as such the same is liable to be set aside.
4.
In the circumstances, I set aside the impugned award passed by the Labour Court, but in view of the fact that the petitioner is no more in service having been superannuated with effect from 3091992, the question of ordering reinstatement does not arise.
Considering the facts and circumstances of the case, I pass the following orders :-  1.
The impugned award of the Labour Court passed on 2351988 in ID No. 346 of 1987 and published later on 26.7.1988 is set aside.
2.
The petitioner shall be deemed to be in continuous service without any break right from inception till he was superannuated.
3.
The petitioner shall be entitled for 25% of the back wages for the period from 16.7.1982 till the date of his reinstatement i.e. 4.10.1988.
4.
The petitioner shall be paid his terminal benefits computing the entire service as continuous and the terminal benefits be settled as expeditiously as possible, but not later than 3 months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order, within which period the 25% of back wages ordered above also shall be paid.
5.
The writ petition is disposed of accordingly.
No order as to costs.
Order accordingly.