Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The suit filed by the plaintiff-respondent having been dismissed by the trial court and his appeal having been allowed by the lower appellate court, the defendant-respondent viz. the State of Punjab and the Director of Agriculture, have come up in this second appeal.
A few facts on which there is no controversy may be noticed.
2.
The plaintiff-respondent was appointed as a Beldar on August 1, 1973.
This appointment was on adhoc basis.
On May 1, 1974, his services were regularised.
On July 26, 1977 he was appointed as a Book Binder on ad hoc basis.
3.
The defendant-respondent Nos. 3 to 5 were also working as Beldar.
While the name of the plaintiff-respondent appeared at Sr. No. 34 in the seniority list, those of respondents 3 to 5 appeared at Sr. Nos. 35, 41 and 42.
The respondents were admittedly junior to the plaintiff-respondent.
4.
Two orders dated April 21, 1979 and August 7, 1979 were passed by which respondent Nos. 3 to 5 were promoted as Agriculture Sub Inspectors.
Complaining that his claim had been illegally ignored, the plaintiff-respondent instituted a suit for declaration to the effect that the promotion of respondent Nos. 3 to 5 was illegal and that he should be treated to have been promoted w.e.f.
April 21, 1979 with all consequential benefits.
The learned Trial Court framed the following issues :-  1. whether the plaintiff was rightly ignored as alleged in the written statement ?
O.P.D.
2. whether the suit is time barred ?
OPD.
3.
Whether the suit is bad for non-joinder of necessary parties ?
OPD.
4.
Whether the suit is not maintainable in the present form ?
OPD.
5.
Whether the plaintiff has no cause of action to file the suit ?
OPD.
6.
Whether the notice under Section 80 CPC was not valid ?
OPD.
7.
Relief.
Finding that the plaintiff-respondent had no lien on the post of Beldar on his appointment as a compositor through the Employment Exchange, the learned trial court found Issue No. 1 against the plaintiff-respondent.
Accordingly, the suit was dismissed.
5.
Aggrieved by the judgment and decree passed by the learned trial Court, he filed an appeal before the lower appellate Court.
The judgment of the trial court having been reversed and the claim of the plaintiff-respondent having been upheld by the Additional District Judge, Sangrur, the State of Punjab has some up in the second appeal.
6.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties.
It is the admitted position that the post of Agricultural Sub Inspector is to be filled up to the extent of 20 per cent "by promotion from amongst experienced literate beldars in the inferior service of the Department...." It is conceded before me that having worked as Beldar from August 1, 1973, the respondent was sufficiently experienced and he was even `literate'.
As such, he had a right to be considered before any one junior to him could be promoted.
Admittedly, this was not done.
Accordingly, the finding of the learned lower appellate court that the rights of the plaintiff-respondent under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution had been violated and that there was denial of equal opportunity, has to be upheld.
7.
Mrs. Charu Tuli, the learned counsel appearing for the appellants, however, contends that the Department was promoting only such persons as possessed the qualification of Matric and that the plaintiff-respondent had passed the said examination only in March 1981.
Accordingly to the counsel, the respondent was not eligible to be considered for promotion on April 21, 1979 or on August 7, 1979 when persons junior to him were actually promoted.
No rule has been brought to my notice which may indicate that the post of Agriculture Sub Inspector had to be filled only from amongst such Beldar as possessed the qualification of Matriculation.
The rule as noticed by the learned lower appellate court only required the Beldar to be experienced and `literate'.
The respondent fulfilled that qualification.
As such, he could not have been ignored on the ground that he did not possess the qualification of Matriculation.
8.
The learned counsel for the appellants then contends that the promotions having been made in the year 1979, the suit which was actually instituted on May 8, 1984 was barred by limitation.
9.
Mr. VK Jindal on the other hand contends that the action of the appellants in not considering the claim of the plaintiff-respondent where persons junior to him were promoted, was violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution and was consequently void.
10.
Whatever be the factual situation, the fact remains that the persons junior to the plaintiff-respondent had been promoted in April 1979.
This order was challenged by the plaintiff-respondent after more than five years.
The suit was clearly barred by limitation in so far as the claim for promotion w.e.f.
April 1979 or August 1979 is concerned.
However, the learned counsel points out that various promotions were made even in subsequent years.
According to the learned counsel, the promotions had taken place even from the year 1981 onwards.
11.
In this situation, the judgment and decree of the learned lower appellate court is modified and to the extent that the claim of the plaintiff-respondent shall be considered with effect from the date when a person junior to him was promoted on or after March 8, 1981.
If the plaintiff-respondent is found suitable, he will be promoted and his pay and seniority in the cadre of Agriculture Sub Inspector shall be fixed on that basis.
Since the plaintiff-respondent is stated to have already been promoted bide order dated June 25, 1991, the retrospective promotion will also help him to get his seniority as an Agriculture Sub Inspector.
Accordingly, the appeal is allowed only to the extent that instead of considering the claim of the plaintiff-respondent w.e.f.
April 21, 1979, the appellants shall consider it w.e.f.
March 8, 1991 onwards.
Consequential reliefs shall also follows.