JS Sekhon, J - Achhar Singh-petitioner had preferred Civil Writ Petition No. 2717 of 1980 against the award of the Labour Court whereby although he was ordered to be reinstated with continuity of service but without awarding any back wages.
The State has also preferred Civil Writ Petition No. 3539 of 1980 against the above-referred award of the Labour Court inter alia on the ground that the Irrigation Department is not an industry as well as on the ground that service of the petitioner were terminated in accordance with the Para 1.129(7) of the Public Works Department Code after giving ten days due notice.
Both these matters shall be disposed of by this order as these are directed against the same award of the Labour Court.
2.
Mr Parminder Singh, learned AAG for the State frankly conceded at the bar that in view of the judgment of the Supreme Court in Des Raj v. State of Punjab, 1988 Labour and Industrial Cases 1713 up-setting the Full Bench decision of this Court in Om Parkash's case 1984 Labour and Industrial Cases 1165, there is no legal controversy about the Irrigation Department of the State Government being not an industry.
He has confined his argument only on the ground that termination of the services of Achhar Singh workman was strictly in accordance with the terms of his employment and the rules governing such employment.
Mr. BK Jhingan, learned counsel for the workman, on the other hand, contends that once the order of termination is held not to be a termination of service simplicitor but on account of some previous back ground, the provisions of Article 311 of the Constitution of India will be attracted and his service cannot be terminated except holding of regular departmental enquiry.
3.
The persual of Annexure P2 and P3 in CWP No. 3539/1980 reveals that while verifying the antecedents of the petitioner from the Senior Superintendent of Police, Amritsar, vide letter Annexure P3 it was brought to the notice of the department that the petitioners was earlier convicted in some cases for undesirable activities and thus is not fit for being retained in service.
Thus, the order of termination dated 121974 (Annexure R-1) although is couched in the language that the service of the petitioner had been terminated on the ground of public interest as the same are not required yet all the same, there is no escape but to conclude that the services of the petitioner were terminated with the above referred back ground of his involvement in some criminal activities resulting in his conviction and keeping in view that he has not disclosed this fact while entering service on 131968.
Admittedly, the petitioner has completed more than 240 days service.
Thus, he is a workman as defined in Section 2(s) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
The Labour Court, on the other hand, has observed that the termination of the services of the petitioner was a simple termination and that the provisions of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 having not been complied with, ordered that the petitioner shall be treated in continuous service.
Any how without going into the controversy in this regard any further, it transpires that the termination of the services of the petitioner without complying with the provisions of Section 25-F of the Act is bad in the eye of law.
4.
The question then arises whether the Labour Court has not rightly granted relief of back wages to the petitioner.
In this regard, it is noteworthy that due to inadvertent mistake, the copy of the order of the Labour Court appended with this petition is not correct as that order comprise of 12 paras but originally order published in the Punjab Govt. Gazette notification dated 1841980 reveals that the impugned order comprised of 16 paras and in the last para, it was held that since the workman was carrying on the business of selling milk during this period was not entitled to any back wages.
The above-referred observations of the Labour Court are well founded as the persual of the copy Annexure P-1 of the statement of workman appended with Civil Writ Petition preferred by him do reveal that he has admitted having purchased one buffalo after getting loan from the Government and that he has been paying loan and sustaining himself on this income although he has qualified his statement that he has been earning Rs. 100/ PM only.
Under these circumstances, it appears that the petitioner remainded employed during the period of termination of the services.
If that is so, then legally he was not entitled to any back wages of this period.
The observation of the Apex Court in Mohan Lal v. The Management of M/s Bharat Electronics, Ltd AIR 1981 Supreme Court 1253 in this regard are thus not attracted to the facts and circumstances of the case.
5.
For the reasons recorded above, there being no merit in these writ petitions, these are ordered to be dismissed, without any order as to cost.
As a sequal thereof the impugned order of the Labour Court dated 1221980 is up-held with all consequential benefits to the workman from the date of award as it is stated that he was not given service under stay order issued by this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 3539 of 1980.