VK Bali, J - The State Transport Commissioner, Punjab has approached this Court by way of present Writ Petition filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India praying for setting aside of award dated 781989 passed by Mrs. Bimla Gautam, Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Union Territory Chandigarh vide which she ordered the reinstatement of the respondent-workman with continuity of service and also held him entitled to back wages from the date of reference i.e. 19101988 onwards.
The brief facts need to be enumerated first :-  2.
Respondent No. 1 Bhajan Singh was appointed as peon through Employment Exchange against leave vacancy on purely temporary basis on 781977 in the State Transport Commissioner's office vide orders dated 1661977.
He was being adjusted from time to time against the leave vacancy but vide orders dated 2551978, he was again appointed as Chowkidar on purely temporary basis with a condition that his services will be liable to be terminated at any time without assigning any reason if his work and conduct was found unsatisfactory.
Bhajan Singh continued to work as Chowkidar till 961980 when his services were terminated.
As per case of the petitioner, the retrenchment/termination order had to be passed as Bhajan Singh was involved in a theft case registered with the Central Police Station Chandigarh under Section 380 IPC vide FIR No. 451 on 15.5.1980 and he remained in police custody for more than 48 hours.
Thereafter he was released on bail.
The respondent-workman kept silent for considerable long time and it was for the first time in 1985 that he made an application to the Conciliation Officer.
When the petitioner was served with the notice of conciliation proceedings it appeared and filed written reply on 13111985 copy whereof has been placed on the records as Annexure P8.
Thereafter, the petitioner did not heard anything in the matter and came to know about the award only when the same was sought to be implemented by respondent No. 1, thus necessitating the petitioner to file the present petition.
3.
The main case of the petitioner is that it had never received notice on 18.4.1989 stated to have been issued to it in the impugned award and it is only on account of non-receipt of any intimation with regard to any proceedings initiated by respondent No. 1 that no appearance could be made in the matter which remained undefended and came to be decided in favour of respondent-workman by proceeding against the petitioner ex parte.
However, before approaching this Court, an application was filed before the Labour Court for setting aside the ex parte award.
Meanwhile respondent No. 1 also filed an application under Section 33-C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act for a direction to the petitioner to allow him to join duty and to make him payment of back wages calculated at Rs. 15,410/-.
When both the applications were pending, the Labour Court on 16.7.1990 is said to have remarked that after the publication of the award in the Official Gazette, he was functus officio and had no jurisdiction to entertain the application for setting aside the ex parte award.
On receipt of advice from the Legal Remembrancer and Director Prosecution and Litigation, the petitioner filed the present Writ petition.
The award is challenged mainly on the ground that the respondent-workman could not be permitted to initiate the matter by moving an application before the Assistant Labour Commissioner-cum-Conciliation Officer, Chandigarh after a period of five years from the date of his termination and later seeking a reference under Section 10(1)(c) of the Industrial Disputes Act after eight years.
It is also the case of the petitioner that it never received notice said to have been sent by the Labour Court and ex parte proceedings conducted against the petitioner were wholly illegal.
4.
The petition has been contested by the workman and it has been pleaded that the present petition, in view of the fact that an application for setting aside an ex parte award was pending, is incompetent as also that the petition suffers from delay and laches and is, therefore, liable to be dismissed.
On merits, it is contended that the workman was appointed against the regular post and his services could not be terminated without holding a proper enquiry.
It is also pleaded that the Court had sent summons to the petitioner to appear before it and since no appearance was in made despite service, the Labour Court had no choice but to proceed in the matter ex parte.
It is required to be mentioned here that in the entire petition nothing at all has been mentioned as to what prevented the petition from either going before the Assistant Labour Commissioner in conciliation proceedings or later in reference under Section 10(1)(c) after so many years.
5.
The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner vehemently contends that the Labour Court clearly erred while proceeding ex parte against the petitioner.
Reference has been made to the award Annexure P2 wherein it is mentioned that since none has appeared on behalf of the management in spite of registered notice having been sent and that registered notice was sent to the management on 18.4.1989 and the same was awaited till 2651989 and the same has not been received back either served or otherwise so there is presumption of law that the notice must have been served upon the management.
After so observing it is mentioned that since none has appeared on behalf of the management so it is proceeded against ex parte.
6.
The second contention of the learned counsel as is obvious from the facts of the case, is that even if there is no limitation for seeking a reference under Section 10(1)(c) of the Industrial Disputes Act yet when there is no plausible explanation for coming to the Court after so many years, the Government itself should have declined the reference or in any case the Labour Court should not view the matter lightly particularly when the lapse of time may result in complete prejudice to the management.
The learned counsel for the workman however, contends that once registered notice is sent at correct address, it shall be presumed that the same has been served.
It is also contended by the learned counsel that once there is no limitation for seeking a reference under Section 10(1)(c), the cause of workman cannot be defeated on that count alone particularly when the order of termination has come into being without following any procedure whatsoever.
7.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that the points raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner have substance and, therefore, the present petition deserves to succeed.
The Labour Court while proceeding ex parte against the petitioner-management held as follows :-  "Notice of this reference was given to both the parties.
Shri Hardayal Singh appeared for the workman.
However, none appeared on behalf of the Management in spite of registered notice having been sent to them.
Registered notice was sent to the Management on 18th April, 1989 and the same was awaited up till 26th May, 1989.
The same was not received back un-delivered.
So there is presumption in law that notice must have been served on the management As none appeared on behalf of the management it was proceeded against ex parte."
8.
A perusal of the extract from the order passed by the Presiding-Officer, Labour Court would, thus, demonstrate that presumption in law was raised that the notice must have been received as the same has not been received back undelivered.
No such presumption could possibly be raised.
It is only in appropriate proceedings if it is proved that the registered letter was sent at correct address that the presumption can be raised that the same must have been received.
Even such a presumption is rebuttable.
In the present case, the service of the summons was awaited uptill 2651989 only whereas the management was issued notice to attend on 18.4.1989.
In such circumstances, the only option with the Labour Court was to either to say that the summons be awaited for sometimes more or issue fresh summons.
The Labour Court, thus, erred while proceeding ex parte against the petitioner.
9.
Coming to the second point involved in this controversy, it shall be seen from the facts of the case that for five years, the workman did not move in the matter at all and after he moved the Conciliation Officer in 1985 which proceedings must have.
proved abortive, it appears that he asked for a reference after three years therefrom.
Even if there is no limitation as such provided but in cases where workmen have been retrenched because of some misconduct on their part, it would be wholly unjust to permit them to seek for a reference after such considerable delay and that too without giving any explanation whatsoever for such delay.
It is not disputed that the management in case of misconduct may not hold a domestic enquiry before terminating the services of a workman and can still prove the same before the Court.
It is also not disputed that when such misconduct is proved even if before the Court, no fault can be found with the order of termination.
The management which is permitted to prove the misconduct may not be able to do so after so many years.
It is common knowledge that the evidence by lapse of time either completely withers away or in any case may not be available in all its details.
The learned counsel for the workman, however, relies upon a decision of this Court in The Patiala Central Cooperative Bank Limited, Patiala v. The Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Patiala, 1990(2) Recent Services Judgments 726 to contend otherwise.
The facts of the aforesaid case however reveal that services of workman alongwith some other workers were terminated in the year 1973 being surplus.
Other workmen challenged the termination and their reinstatement was ordered by the Courts.
The workman in the aforesaid case moved an application to the appropriate authority for reference of the dispute for adjudication to the Labour Court under Section 10(1)(c) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
While dealing with the matter, Ashok Bhan, J held that the making of reference is an administrative action and the Government is the final authority for that and the Labour Court, cannot enter that arena and cannot refuse to entertain the reference on account of delay.
It was held that delay can be a good ground to refuse back wages but in case Labour Court orders reinstatement of the workman, the same cannot be faulted.
All that I would like to say is that the facts of the aforesaid case do not apply to the facts of the case in hand.
The facts of the said case would rather reveal that services of the workmen were retrenched being surplus.
It was not a case of misconduct of any kind whatsoever.
It is an established fact that the workman in the present case was involved in a theft case and F.I.R. was registered against him.
Therefore, it was always open to the management to proceed against the workman departmentally and after holding him guilty to terminate his services.
This course, as has been said above, was even open to the management before the Labour Court also.
It is in this kind of cases that delay in seeking reference assumes all significance.
In given case, the management may not be left with any evidence to prove the guilt on account of lapse of time.
I have already held in Civil Writ Petition No. 4024 of 1986 decided on 2731991 that re-opening the matter after such a long time and that too without giving any explanation of delay would be too inequitus and would be of great disadvantage to the management.
10.
For the reasons stated above, this petition is allowed and the order Annexure P2 i.e. award passed by the Labour Court is quashed.
There shall be no order as to costs.