KP Bhandari, J (Oral)- Petitioner was working as Purchase Assistant with the Yamuna Nagar Central Cooperative Consumers Store Ltd Yamuna Nagar, respondent No. 2.
A criminal case under Sections 408 and 408/409 of the Indian Penal Code was registered against him.
In this case the petitioner was acquitted vide order dated 1911976 passed by the Judicial Magistrate Ist Class, Jagadhri.
The Magistrate in the ultimate paragraph of the judgment dated 1911976, Annexure P/1, recorded a firm finding that the prosecution has failed to prove the case against the accused.
Once the petitioner had been acquitted the very basis of the order of removal from service disappears and it was obligatory on the part of respondent No.2 to review the case of the petitioner in the light of the judgment of the criminal Court but in spite of repeated requests no attention was paid.
The petitioner approached the State Government under Section 10 of the Industrial Disputes Act for reference but the Government vide order, dated 1081976 Annexure P/2 without going into the merits of the case declined to refer the dispute to Labour Court.
This order was contrary to the law laid down by the Supreme Court that the Government while considering the request for reference cannot go into the merits of the case and this should be left to the Labour Court.
The petitioner instead of coming to this court again approached the Government for reference.
The Government, vide order dated 27101977, referred the dispute to the Labour Court.
The Labour Court has declined to decide the dispute on the ground that in the first place, the State Government had declined to refer the dispute for adjudication vide Annexure P-2 and now the Government was not competent to pass the order dated 27101977 Annexure P3 without affording an opportunity of hearing to the management.
The Labour Court was competent to decide only the dispute referred to vide order Annexure P3 on merits and it had no jurisdiction to examine the validity of the order Annexure P2, because it was not the subject-matter of reference.
Thus, the Labour Court exceeded its jurisdiction in examining the validity of the order Annexure P3.
Apart from the fact that the Labour Court had no jurisdiction to pronounce upon the validity of Annexure P3, the view taken by the Labour Court is wholly erroneous.
The order making reference is an administrative order passed by the Government to consider and look into the question whether the Labour dispute exists between the employer and the employee concerned.
Once that opinion has been formed and reference is made, the controversy is to be decided by the Labour Court on merits.
The Labour Court, therefore, wrongly came to the conclusion that Annexare P/3 is bad in law and, therefore, declined to adjudicate upon the reference.
It was not necessary to give any hearing to the management before making any reference.
2.
Mr. RP Bali, learned counsel for the petitioner, has submitted that M/s. Yamuna Nagar Central Cooperative Consumers Store Ltd, Yamuna Nagar, is an instrumentality of the State for the purposes of Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
The respondent No.2 could not, therefore, terminate the services of the petitioner merely on the ground that a criminal case has been registered against him.
The department could at the most put the petitioner under suspension.
It is submitted that the order removing the petitioner from service is plainly illegal, ultra vires, and contrary to the principle of natural justice.
He further submitted that the order of the Labour Court on the face of it is illegal, void and cannot be sustained.
He fairly conceded that the petitioner may be reinstated but he will not claim any back wages.
He, however, submitted that the seniority of the petitioner and the right to promotion, pension, increments and other consequential benefits should be kept intact.
3.
It is well settled that when a criminal case is registered against a public servant, the employer could at the most place him under suspension and the matter is to be adjudicated upon by the competent Court.
The order awarding pre-mature punishment in this case is illegal and cannot be sustained.
In any case after the acquittal of the petitioner by the criminal Court it was obligatory on the respondents to reconsider the matter and reinstate the petitioner.
4.
In view of the above discussion, this writ petition is allowed, the award dated 1361979, Annexure P/9, passed by the Labour Court is set aside.
The order removing the petitioner from service passed by respondent No.2 is also quashed and respondent No. 2 is directed to reinstate the petitioner forthwith.
It is, however, made clear that the petitioner will be entitled to senority, promotion, pensionary and other benefits of grant of increments etc. according to the rules but he will not be entitled to back wages.
In the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.