NK Sodhi, J - Civil Writ Petition No. 938 of 1981 and Civil Writ Petition No. 3019 of 1988 are being disposed of together as common question of law and facts are involved in them.
For the sake of convenience, facts are being noticed from Civil Writ Petition No. 3019 of 1988.
2.
In pursuance of a requisition sent by the State of Punjab on September 21,1971 for recommending names for five posts of doctors for appointment to the Punjab Civil Medical Services Class-I (for short, `PCMS-I') against direct recruitment quota, the Punjab Public Service Commission (hereinafter referred to as `the Commission') advertised these posts on November 20,1971 and invited applications.
Two of the posts were reserved for women whereas one each was reserved for a scheduled caste and an ex-serviceman while the 5th post was for the general category.
When the matter was still pending with the Commission, the State Government sent another requisition on February 25, 1972 for six more posts of doctors.
These additional posts were not advertised by the Commission.
One post each out of these were again reserved for a scheduled caste and an ex-serviceman whereas the other four were for general category candidates.
In response to the advertisement as many as 92 applications were received including those from the petitioner and respondents 2 to 6 herein.
The Commission invited sixty three candidates for interview in June, 1972 and thereafter recommended 11 names including the petitioner and respondents 2 to 6 by a common recommendation as per its letter dated July 7, 1972 (Annexure P2 with the writ petition) in the following manner:  1.
For unreserved posts :  i. Dr. Bhagwant Rai  ii Dr. Bachittar Singh  iii Dr. Himmat Singh Aneja  iv Manmohinder Singh  v Om Parkash Goyal  vi.
Dr. Dalbir Singh Bakshi  vii.
Manohar Lal Sharma  2.
Female candidates :  i. Dr. Jatinder Kaur Cheema  ii.
Dr. Jagjit Kaur  3.
Ex-Servicemen Candidates :  i. Dr. Bal Krishan Kapila  ii Dr. Manmohan Kaur.
It will be seen that the Commission while making recommendation did not determine the inter se order of merit of the recommendees as was required under the proviso to Rule 12(i) of the Punjab Civil Medical Services (Class-I) Rules, 1972 (hereinafter called the Rules).
It may be mentioned that the inter se seniority of the members of Service holding the same class of posts is determined in accordance with Rule 12 of the Rules which reads as under:  "12.
Seniority of Members of the Service : (1) The seniority inter se of the members of the Service holding the same class of posts shall be determined by the length of their continuous service on those posts in the Service :  Provided that in the case of members recruited by direct appointment, the order of merit determined by the Commission shall not be disturbed in fixing the seniority and person appointed as a result of an earlier selection shall be senior to those appointed as a result of subsequent selection:  Provided further that in the came of two or more members appointed on the same date, their seniority shall be determined as follows :-  (a) a member recruited by direct appointment shall be senior to a member recruited otherwise;  (b)a member appointed by promotion shall be senior to a member recruited by transfer;  (c) in the case of members appointed by promotion or by transfer, seniority shall be determined according to the seniority of such members in the appointment from which they were promoted or transferred; and  (d) in the case of members appointed by transfer from different cadres, their seniority shall be determined according to pay, preference being given to a member who was drawing a higher rate of pay in his previous appointment, and if the rates of pay drawn are also the same, then by their length of service in those appointments, and if the length of such service is also the same, an older member shall be senior to a younger member.
Notes:  (1) This rule shall not apply to members appointed on purely provisional basis pending their approval from the Commission.
(2) In the case of members whose period of probation is extended under Rule 11, the date of appointment for the purpose of this rule shall be deemed to have deferred to the extent the period of probation is extended."
3.
Since the Commission did not determine the inter se order of merit of the recommendees, the State Government as per its order dated May 26,1990 fixed the same as under:  1.
Dr. Bhagwant Rai  2.
Dr. Bachitter Singh  3.
Dr. Jatinder Kaur Cheema  4.
Dr. Jagjit Kaur  5.
Dr. Bal Krishan Kapila (Reserved for ex-serviceman)  6.
Dr. Himat Singh Aneja  7.
Dr. Manmohinder Singh  8.
Dr. Om Parkash Goyal  9.
Dr. Dalbir Singh Bakshi  10.
Dr. Manmohan Kaur (Reserved for ex-serviceman)  11.
Dr. Manohar Lal Sharma.
Petitioner was shown at No3 amongst the recommendees of the same selection.
4.
Dr. Dalbir Singh Bakshi (respondent No.6) who was one of the recommendees felt aggrieved by the order of the State Government dated May 26,1980 fixing the inter se seniority and challenged the same by filing a suit for a declaration in the Court of Senior Sub Judge, Sangrur on the ground that determination of seniority was illegal, ultra vires and ineffective as against his rights.
His primary contention before the Court was that his seniority had been fixed without affording any opportunity of hearing to him.
Dr. HS Aneja, another recommendee also felt aggrieved from the same order and filed Civil Petition No. 938 of 1981 in this Court.
While the writ petition of Dr. Aneja was pending in this court, the suit filed by Dr. Bakshi was decreed on July 29, 1983 and the order of the State Government dated May 26,1980 was set aside and respondent-State was directed to refix the seniority of the recommendees only after affording an opportunity of hearing to the plaintiff therein.
The decree of the Civil Court has since become final.
The State Government then issued fresh notices to all the recommendees including the petitioner and respondents 2 to 6 herein on 10.10.1986 mentioning therein the tentative seniority of the doctors as fixed by its earlier order dated May 26, 1980 and invited objections.
Some of the respondents filed objections but the petitioner who was not aggrieved by the earlier order did not file any.
The Secretary to Government of Punjab, Department of Health and Family Welfare then as per order dated May 29,1987 finally determined the inter se seniority of the doctors who were recommended for appointment by the Commission in July, 1972.
According to this order, the petitioner was placed at Sr. No.6 though she had been placed at Sr. No. 3 as per the earlier order dated May 26, 1980.
It is this order of the State Government dated May 29,1987 which has been impugned in the present writ petition.
5.
Having heard counsel for the parties at length, I am of the view that the impugned order deserves to be quashed.
The State Government had fixed the inter se seniority of the doctors as per its earlier order dated May 26,1980 in which the petitioner had been shown at Sr. No3.
As already observed earlier, this order was quashed by the Civil Court in the suit filed by Dr. Dalbir Singh Bakshi, one of the doctors who had been recommended by the Commission.
The Court directed the State Government to fix the inter se seniority only after hearing the parties.
It is true that a notice was issued to all the concerned doctors including the petitioner and they were also afforded personal hearing but while changing their inter se seniority the State Government has not given any reason whatsoever.
The order is silent in regard to the basis on which the inter se seniority of the doctors has been fixed.
A bare perusal of the impugned order reveals that it is like an award of the Arbitrator containing no reason whatsoever.
Seniority is a matter which seriously affects the service prospects of a Govt. servant and the same cannot be determined by a rule of thumb or in an arbitrary manner.
When it had to be refixed or changed after hearing the concerned doctors as was directed by the Civil Court, it goes without saying that the order passed by the Government must necessarily contain reasons for the change and also the process of reasoning which forms the basis of the changed seniority.
This, unfortunately, not having been done, the order has to be set aside.
Learned counsel for the petitioner contended that the petitioner was entitled to seniority from the date of continuous officiation or at any rate, she could not be placed below Sr. No. 4 as she was selected in pursuance of the first requisition and must necessarily rank senior to all those selected in pursuance of the second requisition, dated 2521972.
Since I am remitting the matter back to the State Government for passing a reasoned order for fixing/refixing the inter se seniority of the doctors, it is not necessary for me to go into the merits of these contentions.
6.
Civil Writ Petition No. 938 of 1981 filed by Dr. HS Aneja against the order of the State Government dated May 26,1980 has become infructuous as the order impugned therein already stands quashed by the Civil Court in the Civil suit filed by Dr. Dalbir Singh Bakshi which decree has since become final.
7.
In the result, Civil Writ Petition No. 3019 of 1988 is allowed and the order of the State Government dated May 29,1987 (Annexure P8 with the writ petition) is set aside with a direction to the State Government to refix the seniority of the doctors after affording them an opportunity of hearing and by passing a reasoned order bringing out the basis of such fixation.
Civil Writ Petition No. 938 of 1981 is dismissed as infructuous.
Parties are left to bear their own costs in both the cases.
Ordered accordingly.