Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner impugns the award dated December 5, 1990 by which the labour Court awarded a sum of Rs. 40,000/- to him as compensation for the period he remained unemployed in spite of the fact that the termination of the services was found to be violative of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as the Act).
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
On March 19, 1981, respondent No. 1 offered a contract of appointment for an Overseas Project to the petitioner on the post of Pharmacist.
This appointment was for a contract period of 3 years.
In this letter, it was specifically mentioned that "your initial place of posting shall be at IRAQ and during your posting there you shall receive a salary of ID90 (IRAQI DINARS Ninety only).
However while posting in India, you would receive a salary of Rs. (_______) Rupees (_________) and that in addition to ....." The petitioner avers that he joined his post at Basra on June 5, 1981.
His salary was later on increased to ID 110 per month.
He avers that he suddenly fell ill at Basra.
So, he was sent back to India on account of ill health by respondent No. 2 on March 3, 1982 with a direction that the petitioner shall report to the Head Office.
He claims to have reported on March 5, 1982 to the Head Office of respondent No. 2.
He was called upon to report on March 10, 1982.
The petitioner avers that when he reported on March 10, 1982, he was served with the termination order on the ground that his services are no longer required in India.
A copy of this order has been produced as Annexure P-2.
The order of termination was challenged by the petitioner before the Labour Court.
In spite of the finding that the termination was violative of the provisions of Section 25-F, the Labour Court awarded the petitioner a total of Rs. 40,000/- in lump sum.
Claiming that the petitioner was entitled to the payment of full back wages, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
3.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
It has been inter alia averred that the petitioner had issued the demand notice on June 18, 1983.
A copy of this notice has been produced as Annexure R-2.
It is claimed that on account of delay in raising the demand, the petitioner lost his right to claim full back wages.
It has also been averred that he was gainfully employed during the period in question.
It has been further averred that in fact, the Labour Court had erred in awarding Rs. 40,000/- to the petitioner.
He was not entitled to this amount.
According to the respondents, the petitioner used to get less than Rs. 1000/- per month while he was working in India.
It is only on account of his posting abroad that the petitioner was given three times his salary to which he was actually entitled.
By way of illustration, it has been mentioned that Mr. BM Gupta, Accounts Officer was getting a salary of Rs. 1300/- per month besides Rs. 275/- as House Rent Allowance but on his posting abroad, he was given a salary of I,D.
200 per month.
On return, even his salary was fixed at Rs. 925/-.
It has also been averred that the respondents had filed Civil Writ Petition No. 3204 of 1991 challenging the award which was dismissed with the observation that "we find no error in the impugned order."
On this premises, it is claimed that the petition deserves to be dismissed.
4.
I have heard Mr. MM Kumar, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. Ram Kumar Malik, learned counsel for the respondents.
5.
A perusal of letter of appointment shows that the petitioner had been appointed for a contract period of three years and that his place of posting was to be in Iraq.
It appears from the record as has been found by the Labour Court also that the petitioner had "suffered a mental depression and on his request the management agreed that the workman should be returned to India and the expenses of the workman by air were borne by the company."
It will also manifest from the perusal of the record that the petitioner had got an employment with the Associated Cement Company at Surajpur on December 21, 1984.
He worked with them till October 31, 1985.
Thereafter, he had got a job w.e.f.
September 10, 1987 with the Education Department at Chandigarh.
The petitioner claims that he remained unemployed from March 11, 1982 to September 28,1987.
The petitioner claims wages for this period.
6.
It is indisputable that the petitioner had issued the demand notice only on June 18, 1983.
There is no explanation on the part of the petitioner for waiting for one year and three months before raising the demand.
It is also established on the record that the petitioner was "giving minor medical treatment to villagers in order to earn money for maintaining my children and in order to keep my knowledge alive."
This is so mentioned in the statement of the petitioner himself before the labour Court where he appeared as PW-1.
Still further, one cannot lose sight of the fact that the petitioner had been given a contract appointment for a fixed term of three years.
It is no doubt correct that the management had the discretion to renew this contract appointment.
However, the workman had no indefeasible right to claim renewal.
One cannot also lose sight of the fact that the appointment had been made primarily for posting in Iraq.
It is in the background of these facts that the fairness of the order passed by the labour Court has to be considered.
7.
Having heard learned counsel for the parties, I find that the petitioner has no explanation for not taking any steps to challenge the termination of his services for a period of 15 months.
Still further, it is also reasonable to assume that the salary in India would not have been the same as the salary on a foreign assignment.
In the very nature of things, a person who leaves his home, hearth and family, is entitled to be given some incentive for his posting abroad as compared to another who is posted within the country.
In such a situation, the claim made on behalf of the respondents that the petitioner would not have got the salary of Rs. 3300/- if he had been posted in India, appears to be just and reasonable.
This fact is also further corroborated not only by the instances of the fixation of pay in the case of Mr. BM Gupta, the Accounts Officer but also by the fact that the petitioner on his posting with the Associated Cement Company, got a salary of Rs. 1000/- only.
Still further, the appointment of the petitioner was to last basically for a period of three years which would have expired on June 5, 1984.
In the background of these facts, the action of the labour Court in awarding a total amount of Rs. 40,000/- as lumpsum payment appears to be absolutely just and fair.
8.
The petitioner claims that the amount due to him is more than Rs. 3 lacs.
He served the respondent-management for a period of about 9 months.
He came back to India from Iraq at his own request on account of his health.
A person who serves for less than a year, comes to the Court claiming wages for more than four years.
Such a claim is wholly exaggerated and grossly unfair.
Mr. MM Kumar relies on the decisions of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in M/s. Hindustan Tin Works Pvt Ltd. v. The Employees of M/s. Hindustan Tin Works Pvt Ltd. and others, A.I.R. 1979 S.C. 75 and in Hari Palace, Ambala City v. The Presiding Officer, Labour Court and another, 1979 P.L.R.
720.
There is no quarrel with the propositions laid down in these cases.
In normal circumstances, when the retrenchment is found to be in violation of the provisions of the Act, the workman is entitled to back wages.
However, in this case, the total period of service rendered by the petitioner was less than nine months.
He had left the job on account of his personal reasons of health even though we was required to serve for 3 years.
There was apparently no suitable job available for him in India.
In this situation, the management was constrained to terminate his services.
While doing so, the management overlooked the provisions of Section 25-F of the Act.
As a result, the petitioner was denied the payment of a total sum of Rs. 5000/- approximately.
For this, a compensation of Rs. 40,000/- is more than adequate.
9.
Taking the totality of the circumstances into consideration, I find no ground either in equity or in law to interfere with the discretion exercised by the labour Court.
Consequently, I find no merit in this writ petition which is dismissed.
In the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.