RS Mongia, J - Shri SK Maini, Respondent No. 2, was an employee of M/s Carona Sahu Co Ltd (Petitioner) (in short CSC) and was working as a Shop Manager of the shop known as Carona Shop Store, Near Nehru Gardens, Jalandhar City, since the year 1970.
According to the petitioner, the said respondent had committed serious misconduct in the year 1980.
On the basis of the said misconduct, he was charge-sheeted on 11th November, 1980.
Prior to the issuance of the charge-sheet, Respondent No. 2 had been placed under suspension.
After considering the reply of Respondent No. 2, a regular departmental enquiry was ordered against him and one Shri lqbal Singh, Advocate, was appointed as an Enquiry Officer.
After allowing both the sides to lead evidence, and giving them opportunity of being heard, the Enquiry Officer gave the report against Respondent No. 2.
On the basis of the said enquiry report, the services of Respondent No. 2 were terminated, which was challenged by him by raising an industrial dispute before the Labour Court at Jalandhar.
The primary ground for challenging the termination order was that the enquiry held by the CSC was not fair and proper and it was just a farce, and the name was violative of the principles of natural justice.
The plea of the CSC before the Labour Court was that the enquiry was fair and proper and no fault could be found in the termination order.
By way of preliminary objections, it was stated that the reference was bad in law as the petitioner-Management was registered under the Punjab Shops and Commercial Establishment Act, 1958, and the said Act has over-riding effect over the Industrial Disputes Act.
Secondly, it was pleaded that Respondent No. 2 was working on the post of Manager, and, therefore, not covered under the definition of `workman' as given (in Section 2(s) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as the Act).
2.
The learned Labour Court, Jalandhar, vide its award dated 21st April, 1986, held that Respondent No. 2 was a workman as defined in the Act and that the domestic enquiry held against Respondent No. 2 was neither fair nor proper.
Consequently, the order of termination was set aside and it was ordered that Respondent No. 2 would be reinstated into service with full back wages.
The CSC challenged the said award by way of the present writ petition.
The Motion Bench had stayed the reinstatement of Respondent No. 2 subject to the provisions of Section 17-B of the Act.
3.
The learned counsel for the petitioner raised the following points to assail the award of the Labour Court :-  (1) That Respondent No. 2 is not a workman as defined under Section 2(s) of the Act.
(2) The enquiry conducted by the Management was fair and proper and the same could not be held to be vitiated on the ground that the Enquiry Officer was a person, who was the standing Counsel of the Management, or that Respondent No. 2 was not allowed to engage a lawyer.
(3) The Labour Court went wrong in not affording opportunity to the petitioner to lead evidence and prove the charge against Respondent No. 2 after the Labour Court had come to the conclusion that enquiry was not fair and proper.
4.
Point No. 1.
To find out whether Respondent No. 2, who was working as a Shop Manager, can be said to be a workman or not, it would be appropriate to notice the definition of `workman' as given in Section 2(s) of the Act, as it existed at the relevant time :-  "Workman' means any person (including an apprentice.
), employed in any industry to do any skilled or unskilled, manual, supervisory, technical or clerical work for hire or reward, whether the terms of employment be express nor implied, and for purposes of any proceeding under this Act in relation to an industrial dispute, includes any such person who has been dismissed, or retrenched in connection with or as a consequence, of the dispute, or whose dismissal, discharges or retrenchment has led to that dispute, but does not include any such person :  (i) who subject to the Army Act, 1950 (XLVI of 1950) or the Air Force Act, 1950 (XLV of 1950, or the Navy (Discipline) Act, 1934 (XXXIV of 1934) or;  (ii) who is employed in the police service or as an officer or other employee of a prisoner; or;  (iii) who is employed mainly in a managerial or administrative capacity; or;  (iv) who is being employed in a supervisory capacity, draws wages exceeding five hundred rupees per mensem or exercises, either by the nature, of the duties attached to the office or by reason of the powers vested in him, functions mainly of a managerial nature."
5.
There is a catena of authorities that mere nomenclature or designation of the post would not determine as to whether particular individual is a workman or not under the Act.
It will depend on the dominant nature of duties performed by the individual and not the ancillary duties as to whether the individual is a workman under the Act or not.
There is no dispute between the parties on this proposition of law, and, therefore, no authority need be referred to.
It is further not disputed that at the time of termination of services of Respondent No. 2, he was drawing wages exceeding Rs. 500/- per mensem.
The argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner proceeded that Respondent No. 2 was employed mainly in a managerial and administrative capacity and was also discharging duties and functions mainly of administrative, managerial and supervisory nature, and, therefore, under exceptions (iii) and (iv) to Section 2(s) Respondent No. 2 could not be said to be a workman.
However, the case of Respondent No. 2 was that he was employed mainly to do clerical work and a fraction of his duties may be managerial or supervisory but those were incidental or ancillary to the main clerical duties.
6.
It would be necessary to know as to what were the duties which were to be performed by the Manager of the shop.
While dealing with this point, the Labour Court has referred to the evidence produced before it.
Shri Ramesh Chander Sethi, a Shop Manager of CSC had appeared as a witness of the Management and had also produced his affidavit (Ex. M/1 before the Labour Court).
The contents of the affidavit were testified by him while appearing as MW-1 It has been stated in the affidavit that Shri S K Maini's main duties were of managerial nature.
He was managing the entire affairs of the store and the store-cum-shop was under his independent managerial charge.
He was empowered to employ Helpers and Salesmen for the store-cum-shop temporarily and on his recommendation, the Head Office used to confirm all such temporary employees.
He could also recommend leave of the employees working under him and the same was sanctioned by the Head Office.
It was further stated that the recommendations of Respondent No. 2 in all such cases, in office routine and general management and control in the shop were approved by the Head Office and his recommendations were almost final.
7.
Some of the duties of the Manager are deducible from the duties of the salesman.
A salesman is to prepare cash memos for shoes, sundries etc. sold, to receive cash from customers and then hand over the same to the Manager; to deposit sale proceeds in the Bank, if so instructed by the Shop Manager/Incharge; to assist the Manager/Incharge in placing orders to Head Office and to receive the consignment intended for the shop; to assist the Manager in daily routine and also to assist him in taking ground inventory every fortnight at the time closing the statement; to attend to customer's complaints and settle or forward the complaint form to the Head Office according to the instructions of the Manager; to strictly follow Shop opening and closing time and avail lunch interval in timings fixed by the Manager from time to time; and to carry out all instructions issued by the shop Manager in the interest of the Company.
8.
Another document, which was produced before the Labour Court, to show the duties of the Shop Manager, is dated 1st May, 1979.
According to this document, incidental expenses of the shop such as cartage to and from station, packing material etc. are to be borne by the Shop Manager out of the amount recovered by sale of wooden cases.
He is also to see that the shop is kept clean and the various requisite and stock is maintained well.
The manager is required to send a bonus commission statement to the Head Office after the expiry of each quarter and he is not authorised to accept any process of law in the name of or on behalf of the company or represent the company without written permission of the company in any legal matter or in any other matter not connected with the routine work of the shop.
He is to inform the company immediately without losing any time about any process of court served upon him.
Subject to the terms and conditions mentioned and to any directions or orders which may from time to time be given to him by the Company the Manager has general control over the shop, but he is not authorised to pledge in any way the credit of the company.
He is to keep proper accounts in form or forms as are approved by the Company of moneys, cheques, drafts, etc received at the shop by way of sale proceeds or otherwise are to be forwarded to the Head Office or to be deposited in the Bank account of the Company.
He is to personally open and close the shop at a fixed time.
He can depute a Helper to act as a Salesman in the event of Salesman being absent from duty for 5 days or more at a time and may appoint temporary Helpers for the said period at the prescribed rate of salary.
If the Helper is absent from duty for 4 days or less, he can entrust the work to a sweeper, and can also appoint part-time sweeper.
If a permanent appointment is to be made, the application and other documents duly completed, are to be sent to the Head Office.
Shri Sethi in his statement had stated that he (Shri Sethi) was authorised to impose fine and to charge-sheet salesman/helper and that he was empowered by the Head Office to do so.
In his cross-examination, he stated that other Managers had similar powers.
9.
It was further brought on the record of the Labour Court that under the Punjab Shops and Commercial Establishment Act, 1958, Respondent No. 2 used to fill forms C and D prescribed under that Act, as an employer.
10.
The case of Shri S.K Maini, Respondent No. 2, before the Labour Court, was that though he was designated as a Shop Manager, but he had no administrative or managerial authority.
He was not allowed to grant leave to his co-workers nor he could get explanation or charge-sheet them.
He used to collect cash from all sort of customers.
He used to write and maintain cash books.
He stated in the cross-examination that there was no officer in the shop, but supervision was done by the Assistant Manager with Headquarters at Ambala, who used to visit shop 5/6 times a year.
He further stated that he did not recruit any temporary employee and did not recommend any such employee for confirmation as no temporary employee was employed by him.
11.
After considering all the duties, as referred to above the learned Labour Court came to the conclusion that Respondent No. 2 was a workman under the Act.
12.
The learned counsel for the petitioner argued that from the duties of the Shop Manager, which have been referred to above, it will be evident that primary and the dominant duties of respondent No. 2 were managerial or administrative and to some extent supervisory as well and the clerical duties were incidental or ancillary.
There is no dispute on the point that Respondent No. 2 did not use to perform any duties of a Salesman for selling the articles.
According to him, Managerial duties as opposed to clerical duties, would be that if the person has the power or authorisation to take immediate decision for the time being regarding the establishment under him.
In the instant case, Respondent No. 2 was authorised to take decision as to if a particular salesman is not there for a few days, whether to have a Helper or not.
He could assign duties of a Helper to a Sweeper.
He could also decide when to open or close shop.
He could employ temporarily a Helper.
The salesman was also required to get instructions from the Manager which the salesman was to carry out.
These duties cannot be.
performed by a person who is assigned the clerical work and the duties as indicated above, cannot be termed as clerical duties.
The evidence has also come that the Manager could recommend leave and also recommend persons for permanent appointment.
These duties cannot be said to be clerical.
It was further argued that so far as the evidence regarding the supervisory nature of duties was concerned, that was shut out on the ground that no such pleas was taken in the written statement.
In' the written statement, the plea was that the respondent is not a workman under Section 2(s).
Consequently, evidence on all the exceptions under Section 2(s) could be led to show that Respondent No. 2 was performing administrative or managerial duties as also supervisory.
The learned counsel also submitted that the only test is that a person working in a supervisory capacity or in a managerial capacity must have the power to employ a person or to grant him leave or to take disciplinary action against him, then it will only be an employer who can be said to be not a workman and all others who do not have such a power, though performing administrative, managerial or supervisory duties, would be brought under the definition of "workman".
13.
The learned counsel for the petitioner cited Vimal Kumar Jain v. Labour Court, Kanpur, 1987 (Supp.)
SCC 40, that a Maintenance Engineer who supervises the work of maintenance, has the power to make temporary appointments, grant leave and initiate departmental proceedings, would not be a workman.
He also cited Shri TP Srivastava v. M/s. National Tobacco Co of India Limited, JT 1991(4) SC 121, to the effect that Section Salesman who looked after sales promotion and the duties required imaginative and creative mind, could not be termed as a person doing skilled, unskilled or clerical work.
14.
On the other hand, learned counsel for Respondent No. 2 argued that the primary and the dominant duties of Respondent No. 2 were clerical in nature and some duties here or there, which may be managerial, administrative or supervisory in nature were just incidental or ancillary to the main duties and such duties would not No. 2 from the purview of take out Respondent No. 2 from the purview of the definition of "workman".
The learned counsel cited a Supreme Court judgment reported as National Engineering Industries Ltd v. Shri Krishan Bhagoria and others, A.I.R. 1988 SC 329 where an employee working as Internal Auditor in a company who was performing the main duties of reporting and checking up on behalf of the Management but had no independent right or authority to take decision and his decision did not bind the Company, was held to be not performing any supervisory duties, and, therefore, was held to be a workman under the Act.
He also referred to a judgment of the Supreme Court reported as Shri SK Verma v. Sri Mahesh Chandra and another, 1983(2) S.L.J.
570.
This was a case concerning a Development Officer of Life Insurance Corporation, who was not a whole-time employee of the Corporation.
His operations were restricted to a defined area and was liable to be transferred; he had no authority whatsoever to bind the Corporation in any way; the principal duties were to organise and to develop the business of the Corporation in the area allotted to him and for that purpose he could recruit active and reliable agents and was to train them to canvass new business and to render post-sale services to policy-holders; to assist and inspire the agents but had no authority to appoint agents or to take disciplinary action against them and was not required to supervise the work of agents and such agents were not his subordinates.
There was no subordinate staff working under him.
It was under these circumstances that it was held by the Supreme Court that the Development Officer was not engaged in any administrative or managerial work and, therefore, was a workman under the Act.
The learned counsel also relied upon another judgment of the Supreme Court reported as Ananda Bazar Patrika (Private) Ltd. v. Its Workmen, 1969(II) LLJ 670.
In this case, the employee was the Incharge of the Provident Fund Section of the Ananda Bazar Patrika (Private) Ltd and was designated as Manager.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the Management, it had been pleaded that the employee used to supervise the work of the Clerks working under him, allot work to them, give them directions regarding work, grant them permission to leave office during working hours and recommend their leave.
However, when the employee came in the witness box he was not asked in the cross-examination any question as to whether he was supervising the work of the Clerks working under him or used to allot work to them or gave them directions regarding their work.
On the other hand, the employee had stated that the main duties which he was required to carry out, were those of writing out the cash book and of filing up the various returns required to be prepared in the section of which he was the Incharge.
On this evidence he was held to be a workman.
15.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and examining the nature of duties performed by Respondent No. 2 and after applying the principles laid down in various judgments cited at the bar, I am of the view that the Labour Court went wrong in holding that Respondent No. 2 was a workman.
It is no doubt true that mere designation of the post held by an employee is not at all the determining factor as to whether he is workman under the Act or not.
The main and dominant nature of duties performed by the employee would be the determining factor.
The managerial or the administrative duties are different than the supervisory nature of duties and some of them may even overlap.
The Legislature itself had made a distinction between the managerial and administrative type of duties and the supervisory nature of duties.
Clauses (iii) and (iv) of Section 2(s) of the Act may be referred to in this connection.
According to me, a person would be said to be performing the managerial or administrative type of duties if he is managing the show of the Management at a particular place where he is employed and is really the Incharge or the master of that show for the time being.
If he can take decisions, even though temporarily for the time being, to run the show, he will be discharging the managerial or the administrative duties of the Management.
Seen in this background it will be evident that the predominant duties of Respondent No. 2 were administrative or managerial and to some extent even supervisory.
The power to employ or dismiss or even to initiate disciplinary action may not be the sole basis.
This test may became very relevant in case it is to be found out whether the duties are supervisory in nature.
The details of duties have already been referred to above which Respondent No. 2 was performing.
Out of all the duties couple of duties like maintaining accounts filling in certain proforma may be clerical.
However, his major job was administrative or managerial.
The authorities cited by the respondents's counsel were decided on the facts of those cases and were mainly in the context of finding out whether the employee was discharging duties of supervisory nature.
In Ananda Bazar Patrika's case (supra), cited by the counsel for the respondent, if it had been proved by the Management that the employee used to supervise the work of the Clerks, allot them work and give them directions regarding work or grant them permission to leave and recommend their leave, then the employee may not have come under the definition of `workman' but these things were not even put to the employee when he was in the witness box.
16.
The Labour Court was also not right in shutting out the evidence of the Management when it tried to show that some of the duties of Respondent No. 2 were supervisory in nature.
The management had pleaded that Respondent No. 2 was not a workman under Section 2(s) of the Act and it could legitimately lead evidence to take out the respondent from the purview of the definition of `workman' to bring the case under exception (iii) or (iv) of Section 2(s) of the Act.
From the above discussion, I hold that Respondent No. 2 was not a workman under Section 2(s) of the Act.
17.
Point No. 2.
The Labour Court had held that the domestic enquiry against Respondent No.2 was vitiated primarily on two grounds.
viz (i) that the Enquiry Officer was an employee of the Management being their standing counsel, and (ii) that Respondent No. 2 was not granted permission to have the assistance of a lawyer.
I am afraid these were not good grounds to hold that the domestic enquiry was vitiated.
The duties and the interest of an employee of the Management while holding an enquiry against a person do not clash.
If it were so, then no employee of the Management can become an Enquiry Officer and in all cases another employee of some other Management or a third person would have to be engaged for the purpose of enquiry.
It is well known in service jurisprudence that one of the employee in the department holds an enquiry against a delinquent official, be it a Corporation or an employee in Government service.
There is no such bar to the employee of the Management being appointed as an Enquiry Officer unless it is held that the enquiry officer is biased or that in the particular enquiry the Enquiry Officer had an interest against the delinquent official.
Apart from above, it may be observed that Respondent No. 2 never raised any objection against the appointment of the Enquiry Officer, who was an Advocate.
This being the position, he could have been allowed to raise this point that the Enquiry Officer should not have held the enquiry.
18.
As far as the permission to have the assistance of a lawyer is concerned, it may be observed that it is not necessary that in all cases, the workman should be allowed to be represented by a lawyer.
Simply because the Enquiry Officer is a Law Graduate, would not entitle the workman to have the assistance of a Lawyer.
Under the Standing Orders of the Management, the workman is only entitled to the assistance of another employee and not a lawyer.
No fault could be found with the enquiry on this ground.
19.
Point No. 3.
Under Section 11-A of the Act, even if the Labour Court had found that the enquiry was vitiated, as it was not properly held, then permission should have been granted to the Management to lead evidence to prove the charges before the Labour Court.
In other words, the Labour Court should have turned itself into an Enquiry Officer.
In the Workman of M/s Firestone Tyre and Rubber Co of India (Pvt) Ltd. v. The Management and others, (1973)1 SCC.
813, various principles as emerged after the introduction of section 11-A of the Act were enunciated.
The relevant principles in this case are as follows :-  "(4) Even if no enquiry has been held by an employer or if the enquiry held by him is found to be defective, the Tribunal in order to satisfy itself about the legality and validity of the order, had to give an opportunity to the employer and employee to adduce evidence before it, it is open to the employer to adduce evidence for the first time justifying his action, and it is open to the employee to adduce evidence contra.
(5) The effect of an employer not holding an enquiry is that the Tribunal would not leave to consider only whether there was a prima facie case.
On the other hand, the issue about the merits of the impugned order of dismissal or discharge is at large before the Tribunal and the latter, on the evidence adduced before it, has to decide for itself whether the misconduct alleged is proved.
In such cases, the point about the exercise of managerial functions does not arise at all.
A case of defective enquiry stands on the same footing as no enquiry.
(8) An employer, who wants to avail himself of the opportunity of adducing evidence for the first time before the Tribunal to justify his action, should ask for it at the appropriate stage.
If such an opportunity is asked for the Tribunal has no power to refuse.
The giving of an opportunity to an employer to adduce evidence for the first time before the Tribunal is in the interest of both the management and the employee and to enable the Tribunal itself to be satisfied about the alleged misconduct."
The Labour Court was not right in denying the opportunity to the Management to lead evidence on the ground that it wanted to fill in the lacuna in the evidence which had been left by it before the Enquiry Officer.
Under the principles enunciated above, the Management had a right to adduce evidence before the Labour Court, in case it was held that the enquiry was vitiated on any ground.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is allowed and the award of the Labour Court, dated 21st April, 1986 is set aside.
There will be no order as to costs.