RS Mongia, J - The petitioner was appointed as Motor Vehicle Inspector (a Class II post), in the Transport Department in the State of Punjab in the year 1977 and is still continuing on the same post.
2.
In 1979, the Commercial and Non-Commercial Wings of the Transport Department were bifurcated.
However, Class III personnel of the Non-Commercial Wing to which the petitioner belongs continued to be governed by the earlier Class III Rules 1963 Rules which were in existence prior to the bifurcation of the two wings.
It may be observed here that for the Class II Service in the non-commercial wing of the Transport Department, a new set of rules was framed under Article 309 of the Constitution of India in the year 1985.
The Rules are called the Punjab Transport (Non-Commercial Wing) Class II Service Rules, 1985 (hereinafter called the Class II Rules).
3.
Under the Class II Rules, there exists a solitary post of Extra Assistant Transport Controller (Technical) in short EATC(T).
Rules 8 of the Class II Rules providing the method of recruitment to the service and qualifications, required for the posts in the service is in the following terms :-  "8(1) Recruitment to the Service shall be made by promotion;  Provided that if no suitable candidate is available for promotion to a post in the service by promotion then recruitment to such a post shall be made by direct appointment;  Provided further that if in the case of Extra Assistant Transport Controller (Statistics and Commercial), no suitable candidate is available for recruitment by promotion or by direct appointment, as case may be, then such a post shall be filled in by transfer of a person having qualifications and experience specified for recruitment by direct appointment.
(2) No person shall be appointed to any post in the Service unless he possesses qualifications and experience specified against that post in Appendix `B' to these rules.
(3) All appointments to the Service by promotion shall be made by selection on seniority-cum-merit basis and no person shall be entitled to claim promotion on the basis of seniority alone.
(4) ... ... ...  4.
In Appendix `B' the method and qualification for appointment to the post of EATC(T) have been given which is as under :  "APPENDIX `B' Designation of post Promotion Direct appointment by transfer Extra Assistant Transport Controller (Technical) From amongst Motor Vehicles Inspectors working under the State Transport Controller, Punjab who are matriculates and have an experience of working as such for a minimum period of 8 years.
(i) He should hold three years Diploma in Automobile Engineering recognised by the Government, and (ii) should have an experience of working in Motor Road Transport in a supervisory capacity in a Government Transport undertaking for a minimum period of five years."
5.
On August 28, 1961, the post of EATC(T) had fallen vacant.
Shri Balwant Singh Mangat who was the senior most Motor Vehicle Inspector at that time was appointed against the said post in his own pay scale on account of the fact that a court case was pending against him.
Later on, Shri Mangat was reverted to his original post of Motor Vehicle Inspector in May, 1987.
One Shri N.C. Puri, Service Engineer, Central Workshop Punjab Roadways, Chandigarh was given additional charge of EATC(T) in addition to his own duties.
However, vide order August 12, 1983 (Annexure P1) said Mr. Puri was given the full charge of the post in question.
6.
The present writ petition was filed challenging the appointment of Shri Puri to the post of EATC(T) and it was claimed that the petitioner being the senior most Motor Vehicle Inspector had a right to be considered for promotion to the said just in accordance with Class II Rules.
During the pendency of the writ petition, Shri Puri was removed from the post of EATC(T).
On June 26, 1991, the post of EATC(T) was abolished and a new post of Manager (Technical) in the pay scale of Rs. 2400-4000 was created with immediate effect.
In the order creating the post, it was mentioned that the post of Manager (Technical) would be filled by temporary transfer from the cadre of General Managers, Punjab Roadways having technical qualifications.
The writ petition was amended to challenge the order abolishing the post of F.A.T.C.
(T) and creation of the post of Manager (Technical).
The order has been attached as Annexure P4 which reads as under :-  "The post of Extra Assistant Transport Controller (T) Punjab in the office of STC, Punjab, Chandigarh is hereby abolished and post of Manager Technical in the pay scale of Rs. 2400-4000 for the year 1991-92, is created with immediate effect.
This post will be filled up by temporary transfer from the cadre of General Managers, Punjab Roadways having technical qualifications.
2.
This issues with the concurrence of the Finance Department conveyed vide their IO No. 1-2(3)91-FE.VII/1769 dated 2461991.
Chandigarh 26 June 1991, Shyama Mann IAS, Decretary to Govt Punjab Department of Transport.
7.
Civil Misc. No. 4984-A of 1991 was moved by the petitioner in this case with a prayer that the appointment to the post of Manager (Technical) which was created vide impugned order dated 26th June, 1991, should be staved.
I, vide order dated 7th August, 1991 in that application declined to stay the appointment to the post of Manager (Technical).
However, I had observed that any such appointment would be subject to the final decision for the writ petition.
One Shri Hardev Singh Jaggi, General Manager, Punjab Roadways was appointed as Manager Technical on August 20, 1992 subject to the decision of the writ petition.
8.
Before adverting to the arguments raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner, I may first deal with the point raised by the learned counsel for the respondent that the question of abolition of a post, cannot be made the subject matter of judicial review as the creation and abolition of a particular post is the prerogative of the State Government.
According to the learned counsel, this court cannot go into the wisdom of the State Government whether a particular post should be continued or not or whether in its place a new post should be created.
In support of this submission, he cited a Supreme Court judgment reported as Mr. Ramanatha Pillai v. State of Kerala and another, 1974(1) S.L.R.
225.
Therein, it was observed as under :-  "The power to create or abolish a post is not related to the doctrine of pleasure.
It is a matter of Governmental policy.
Every sovereign Government has this power in the interest of necessity of internal administration.
The creation or abolition of post is indicated by policy decision, exigencies of circumstances and administrative necessity.
The creation, the continuance and the abolition of post are all decided by the Government in the interest of administration and general public ......
The power to abolish any civil post is inherent in every sovereign Government.
This power is a policy decision exercised by the executive.
This power is necessary for the proper functioning and internal administration of the State ....
The abolition of post may have the consequence of termination of service of a Government servant.
Such termination is not dismissal or removal within the meaning of Article 311 of the Constitution.... whether after abolition of the post the Government servant who was holding the post would or could be offered any employment under the State would therefore be a matter of policy decision of the Government because the abolition of post does not confer on the person holding the abolished post any right to hold the post."
The learned counsel for the respondents also relied upon a Division Bench judgment of this Court in a case reported as Dr. Suresh Chander Sharma & others v. The Haryana Dairy Development Co-operation Federation Ltd & another, 1991(2) SCT 218 : 1990(7) SLR 107 wherein the above observation of the Supreme Court was quoted in extenso.
9.
The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that there is no quarrel with the preposition as enunciated by the Supreme Court in the above referred case.
He submitted that in the very judgment of the Supreme Court (supra) relied upon by the learned counsel for the respondents, it was observed as under :-  "A post may be abolished in good faith.
The order abolishing the post may lose its effective character, if it is established to have been made arbitrarily, mala fide or as a mask of penal action within the meaning of Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India."
He further submitted that the Supreme Court in a case reported as K Rajendran v. State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 1982 SC 1107 observed as under :-  "The power to abolish a civil post is inherent in the light to create it.
The Government has always the power, subject of course, to the constitutional provisions, to re-organise a department to provide efficiency and to bring about economy.
It can abolish an office or post in good faith.
The action to abolish a post should not be just a pretense taken to get rid of an inconvenient incumbent."
It was further pointed out in the said authority that whether the action taken is legislative or executive, it is always subject to judicial review.
It was stated thus :-  "The power to abolish a post which may result in the holder thereof ceasing to be a Government servant has goy to be recognised.
But we may hasten to add that any action legislative or executive taken pursuant to that power is always subject to judicial review."
10.
In view of the above judgments of the apex Court, it is evident that the action of abolition of the post by the Government is subject to judicial review, though the scope may be very limited as indicated by the apex court itself.
11.
The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted the following points to assail the order of abolition of the post of EATC(T) :-  i) In fact, there has been no abolition of the post and just a new post has been created with different nomenclature/designation as a ruse to deprive the petitioner and his class of Motor Vehicle Inspectors from being considered for promotion to the post of EATC(T) under Class II Rules.
Therefore, the action was wholly arbitrary and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
ii) Under the Class II Rules, there was a solitary post of EATC(T) to which the Motor Vehicle Inspectors could be considered for promotion.
By abolishing the post, all avenues of promotion for the class of Motor Vehicle Inspectors have been shut and the chances of promotion to any higher post have been reduced to nil.
The said action is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
iii) The order suffers from legal mala fide inasmuch as to give benefit to the General Managers, a new post had been created for them for being appointed as Manager Technical and till date, no technical qualifications as are envisaged by the impugned order have been laid down either by rules or executive instructions.
12.
In support of the first point; learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that during the pendency of the writ petition, Shri Hardev Singh Jaggi, General Manager, Punjab Roadways had been appointed by way of transfer to the newly created post of Manager Technical.
He had been assigned the duties of the post by the State Transport Commissioner, Punjab, Chandigarh vide order dated 4th August, 1992, a copy of which has been brought on record as Annexure P6 on the file.
The said order reads as under :-  "With the appointment of Manager (Technical), Punjab in this office he is entrusted the following duties/functions with immediate effect :-  1) Supervision and general work relating to Ministers Car Section and Maintenance of Ministers cars and staff cars;  2) Fixation of fare and freight rates and arrangement of cars and transport for VIPs;  3) Supervision of the work of MVIs and scrutiny of their weekly and monthly diaries/Tech.
Branch;  4) All cases relating to amendment of Chapter VII of the Motor Vehicles Act and Rules;  5) Cases relating to all technical matters, body lay out and designs of transport vehicles and staff cars and registration of new vehicles;  6) Work relating to Govt Motor Vehicles Board, condemnation and inspection of Govt vehicles and staff cars;  7) Computerisation; Tourist;  8) Inspection of PNZ/buses, as a member of Board of Inspection at Chandigarh;  9) Advisor to STC/STA, Punjab in all technical matters.
Shri Surinder Singh, steno-typist is hereby posted with Manager (Technical), however, he shall continue to attend the work of Establishment Branch till further orders.
The work of Manager (T) shall be routed through JSTC(T), Punjab."
The learned counsel has also brought on record the duties which were being performed by EATC(T) by way of Annexure P7.
Instead of mentioning these duties, it may be observed here that these are verbatim the same as the duties of the Manager (Technical) which have been reproduced above.
There is no difference of even a common or the serial number of duties.
13.
From the above, learned counsel for the petitioner wanted to highlight that if one post is abolished and another is created with different nomenclature, but with identical duties, it will not amount to abolition of post, rather it would be deemed that the same post is in existence and the purported abolition is just a ruse or pretence to get rid of the incumbent from the post sought to be abolished or to deprive a particular person or class from being considered for appointment to the post sought to be abolished.
In support of his contention, he relied upon a Division Bench judgment of this Court reported as Prem Chand and others v. State of Haryana and others, I.L.R.
1989(2) Punjab & Haryana 315.
In para 16 of the judgment, it has been observed as under :-  "The power of the executive to abolish a post has been well recognised but must always be exercised in good faith and in public interest and never arbitrarily.
A formal order of abolition of a post is not decisive of the question whether the post has factually been abolished.
Whether a particular post has been abolished or not would depend upon the facts of an individual case.
Where a post is formally abolished but another post by some other designation of the same nature and character with identical duties and responsibilities and conditions of service is created, the court may find that no post was abolished, change being merely in designation.
Similarly it is also possible that an exiting post is abolished and another post of an entirely different nature but with the same designation is created.
In that case it would not necessarily follow that simply because anther post is created with the same designation, the existing post was not abolished.
Shankaranayan v. State or Mysore, AIR 1966 SC 1571 is an instance of a case where the existing post was held to be abolished even though the newly created post had the same designation.
It was observed thus :  "It is argued that even after abolition, the same posts are sought to be continued.
It is no doubt true that the names of the officers have not been changed but there is a structural difference between the posts that have been abolished and the posts that have been created.
The posts created by the new Act are stipendiary posts.
They carry salaries according to the grade created by the rules.
The incumbents are transferable and their service is pensionable.
Different qualifications are prescribed for the new posts.
From a consideration of the incidents attached to the new posts it is clear that the old posts have been abolished and new posts have been created and that the whole complexion of the posts has been changed."
14.
The learned counsel for the respondents submitted that in fact, the petitioner had not been holding the post of EATC(T) and, therefore, he cannot challenge the abolition of the post.
Further he submitted that it was for the State Government to see whether a particular post should be continued or not.
I had sent for the original file dealing with the case relating to abolition of the post.
It has been mentioned that the post EATC(T) had been lying vacant for quite some time and the State Transport Commissioner had no technical Officer to help him either in framing of policy matters or even in routine supervision of the fleet of cars meant for the Ministers' Car Section.
In the absence of any assistance to the office of State Transport Commissioner, the technical and qualitative aspect of Non-Commercial Wing suffered badly.
It was further suggested that the post of EATC(T) carrying a grade of Rs. 2000-3500 may be abolished and a post Manager (Technical) may be created in the grade of Rs. 2400-3500 which is equivalent to the grade of General Manager and may be filled up essentially by transfer of General Manager of the Punjab Roadways having technical qualifications.
It was further felt that filling up of an isolated post through direct recruitment is highly undesirable as it creates vested interest and also leads to frustration when further avenues are not available.
15.
According to the learned counsel for the respondents, it was for the above said reasons that the post of EATC(T) was abolished and instead a post of Manager (Technical) was created to be filled in from the General Managers having technical qualifications.
To my pointed query, learned counsel for the respondents has stated that so far the technical qualifications required by the General Manager to hold the post of Manager (Technical), have not been spelled out by any rules or instructions.
16.
In view of the documents on record, counsel for the respondents could not dispute that the duties of the post of Manager (Technical) are identical in all respects to the duties of the post of EATC(T).
It is not understood as to why another post carrying the same duties was created if a post having the same duties was already in existence.
The only difference that is being made is that now the newly created post will be filled by a General Manager of the Punjab Roadways having technical qualifications.
If the only snag was that the Motor Vehicle Inspectors, though eligible for consideration for promotion under the rules, were not good enough to hold the post of EATC(T) which carried the same duties as of the Manager(T) then the Government could have amended the Rules to lay down particular qualifications.
To deprive eligible persons under the rules for consideration for promotion to the post by creating another post with different nomenclature would, to my mind, be wholly arbitrary and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
In a way, it really amounts to not abolishing the post at all, as held by the Divisions Bench in Prem Chand's case (supra).
Simply by adding to the qualifications for eligibility to be appointed to the post would not amount to abolition of a particular post.
17.
Since, I am holding that in law, post of EATC(T) did not stand abolished, the petitioner and all eligible Motor Vehicle Inspectors would have a right to be considered for the post.
18.
Even the second point urged by the petitioner's counsel to assail the impugned order in well merited.
It has been held by the Supreme Court that reasonable promotional opportunities should be available in every wing of public service as it generates efficiency in service and fosters appropriate attitude to grow for achieving excellence in service.
In the absence of the promotional prospects the service is bound to deygenerate and stagnation kills the desire to serve property.
In Raghunath Prasad Singh v. Secretary, Home (Police) Department Government of Bihar and others, AIR 1988 SC 1033 where the petitioner had no promotional avenues at all, the apex Court after observing that promotional avenues should be available in every wing of the public service, directed the State of Bihar to provide at least two promotional opportunities to the officers of the State of Police in the Wireless Organisation within six months from the date of the judgments by making appropriate amendments in the Rules.
19.
Similarly in Dr. Ms. OZ Hussain v. Union of India and others, AIR 1990 SC 311 where some officers in one of the departments had no promotional avenues, the Apex Court observed as under :-  "This Court, has on more than one occasion, pointed out that provision for promotion increases efficiency of the public service while stagnation reduces efficiency and makes the service ineffective.
Promotion is thus a normal incidence of service.
There too is no justification why while similarly placed officers in other Ministries would have the benefit of promotion, the non-medical `A' Group scientists in the establishment of Director General of Health Services would be deprived of such advantage.
In a welfare state, it is, necessary that there should be an efficient public service and therefore, it should have been the obligation of the Ministry of Health to attend to the representation of the Council and its members and provide promotional avenue for this category of officers.
It is, therefore, necessary that on the model of rules framed by the Ministry of Science and Technology with such alterations as may be necessary appropriate rules should be framed within four months from now providing promotional avenue for the `A' category scientists in the non-medical wing of the Directorate."
20.
While abolishing the post and creating a new post of Manager (Technical), even the Government itself had observed that if isolated posts are filled in by direct recruitment, it leads to frustration when further avenues are not available.
In the present case by abolishing the solitary post of EATC(T), the hopes and aspirations, however little, to the Motor Vehicle Inspectors like the petitioner, were totally dashed to the ground as they will remain Motor Vehicle Inspectors throughout their service career.
The petitioner himself had been continuing on this post since 1979.
He claims to be the senior-most, as according the him the next person in the seniority list i.e. Mr. Mangat is no more in the race for post of EATC(T).
The right for consideration of the petitioner for the post of EACT(T) is not very remote even if he is at number 2 in the seniority list.
The Supreme Court in the above noted authorities has clearly laid down that is in the interest of the efficiency of service that promotional avenues should be provided, but what I find in the present case is that whatever little promotional avenues for the Motor Vehicle Inspectors were under the Class II rules those have been taken away by the impugned order by abolishing solitary post of EATC(T).
On this ground also I hold that the abolition of the post is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
21.
For the view I have taken on first and second points raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner, it is not necessary in the circumstances of the case, to go into the other point raised by the petitioner's counsel for assailing the impugned order.
22.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is allowed and the impugned order dated June 26, 1991 (Annexure P4) is quashed.
It is further directed that the case of all the eligible Motor Vehicle Inspectors for promotion to the Post of EATC(T) be considered immediately and in case none of them is found suitable after valid consideration, then the resort may be had to other method of recruitment mentioned in Rule 8 of Class II Rules.
In the circumstances of the case, I make no order as the costs.
Petition allowed.