HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner passed his Matriculation examination in the year 1975 and thereafter secured the AMIE qualification.
The petitioner also enrolled himself for the Master of Engineering Course and was awarded a diploma in that discipline.
The Punjab State Electricity Board (hereinafter called the Board) issued an advertisement (Annexure P 1) dated July 1, 1986 for recruitment of Assistant Engineers.
It was stipulated that the applicants were required to have a Degree in Electrical/Mechanical/Telecommunications/Electronics Engineering from any University in India and should have passed Punjabi of Matric standard or is equivalent.
It was made clear in the advertisement that the total number of posts that were required to be filled up were 150 and 120 posts were for Assistant Engineers (Electrical) and 30 for Assistant Engineers (Telecommunications/Electronics).
The petitioner duly applied within the time stipulated and was issued Roll No. 1034 which entitled him to admission to the written test which was the sole criterion for adjudging the suitability for selection.
This test was held on December 7, 1986, and the result was published on December 27, 1986 vide Annexure P2.
The petitioner figured in that list.
After verification of certificates, etc., the first batch of successful candidates was appointed from the list Annexure P2.
The Board thereafter published a second list of successful candidates Annexure P4, dated 15th October, 1987, and the petition figured in that list as well.
It appears that the Board had some misgivings about the selections that had been made and, therefore, decided to readvertise the posts that had so for remained unfilled and the re-advertisement was in fact made inviting fresh applications on 22nd September, 1988.
It has been pointed out by Mr. Khehar, learned counsel for the petitioner, that his client figured at Serial No. 102 in the list Annexure P2, in order of merit, in the general category and that the candidates up to serial No. 100 had already been appointed and the last appointment being made by the Board itself on 14th September, 1988.
It appears from the sequence of events that certain candidates who had been selected but not given appointments, some of them being admittedly lower in merit to the petitioner, approached this Court by way of a writ petition and having failed ultimately filed special leave petitions before the Hon'ble Supreme Court.
The Supreme Court in an agreed order appended as Annexure P9/8 directed as under :-  "On the suggestion of the learned counsel for the parties, the question is disposed of in the following manner :-  i) Out of the ten petitioners, petitioner Nos. 1, 2, 5, 6 and 8 who are Electrical Engineers will be appointed by the Punjab State Electricity Board as Assistant Engineers (Electrical) against the existing vacancies.
ii) The remaining five petitioners, namely, petitioner Nos. 3, 4, 7, 9 and 10 who are Mechanical Engineers, will be appointed within one year against vacancies of Mechanical Engineers and till the aforesaid five petitioners are appointed, no other person shall be appointed as Mechanical Engineer-  iii) x x x x  x x x x"  As there appeared to be some confusion in the mind of the Board, an application was moved before the Supreme Court for clarification of the aforesaid order, and the following clarificatory order was made which has been appended as Annexure P9/C :-  "After hearing learned counsel for the parties we consider it necessary to clarify this Court's order dated August 8, 1989.
It is stated before us that the petitioner No. 6 in respect of whom directions have been issued in paragraph 1 of the order for being appointed as Assistant Engineer (Electrical) against the existing vacancy is not an Electrical Engineer; instead he falls in the category of Mechanical Engineer.
In this view he may be appointed as Mechanical Engineer in accordance with the directions contained in Paragraph 2 of the order.
We make it clear that even if vacancies arise after one year the respondent will carry out the directions as contained in paragraph 2 of the order.
No further clarification is required except that the petitioner No. 6 is entitled to the benefit of the directions contained in paragraph 2 of the order.
All appointments so made will be under Punjab State Electricity Board Services of Engineers (Electrical) Regulations, 1965."
It has been urged by Mr. Khehar that from a pending of the aforementioned order, it was appellent that the Board itself had treated Assistant Engineer (Electrical) and Assistant Engineer (technical) as two separate categories for purposes of recruitment to the post of Assistant Engineer.
It appears that the petitioner not having been able to secure appointment moved a represatation before the Board and requested that case may be considered but on receiving no factory reply, he has filed the present writ petition.
2.
The stand of the petitioner in the writ petition, as also at the time of arguments, has been that 120 posts of Assistant Engineers (Electrical) had been advertised and at least that number of candidates from the electrical trade should have been selected for appointment.
He has urged that admittedly, the Board itself has given appointment to 77 Electrical Engineers out of 120 posts advertised and the last Electrical Engineer, according to the written statement, who was selected stood at Serial No. 100 in order of merit, whereas the petitioner figured at Serial No. 102.
It has also been urged that thereafter the candidate with merit at No. 101 had also been appointed under orders of the Supreme Court and certain other persons who approached the Supreme Court and are admittedly lower to the petitioner in order of merit had been given appointment as a consequence of Annexures P9/B and P8/C.
It has also been urged that if the appointment given to 90 Mechanical Engineers against the newly advertised vacancies were to be ignored, the petitioner was undoubtedly entitled to selection on his own merit.
He has also relied upon Ms. Neelima Shangla v. State of Haryana, AIR 1987 SC 169; State of Haryana and another v. Rajinder Kumar, 1990(5) SLR 788 and Shankarasan Dash v. Union of India, JT 1991(2) SC 380 : 1991(2) SCT 194 in support of his contention that although it is not incumbent upon the employer to fill in all the vacancies advertised from the select list yet if this was not done, the employer was required to make out a case and give valid reasons for this in action, failing which the court would regard the conduct of the employer as being arbitrary.
3.
In the written statement filed by the respondent Board, the stand taken is that after some appointments had been made, the Board realized that an imbalance was likely to be created should be (sic) the selected persons be given appointment, as various reserved categories such as scheduled castes/tribes, etc., which were also to be accommodated had not been given a chance to apply.
It has been stated that the Board in its meeting held on 22nd August, 1988, took the view that the posts which remained unfilled up to that date needed to be readvertised so as to give necessary representation to the reserved categories.
It has also been asserted that the advertisement Annexure 1 which laid down the qualifications for appointment provided that even Mechanical Engineers were eligible of appointment to the advertised posts and keeping in view this fact, as also the additional factor that electrical/mechanical/electronics/telecommunication engineers formed one cadre having one seniority, it was open to the Board to select Assistant Engineers having the mechanical trade for the post of Assistant Engineers (Electrical).
4.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I find merit in the stand of the petitioner.
It is the conceded case that the posts that were advertised pertained to Assistant Engineers (Electrical) - 120 and Assistant Engineers (Electronics/Telecommunications) 30.
It is also clear that no posts of Assistant Engineers (mechanical) were advertised although the advertisement did provide that the candidates having Degree in Mechanical Engineer were also eligible for appointment to the posts in question.
There seems to be merit in the stand of the petitioner that had the selection been confined only to Electrical Engineers and not the Mechanical Engineers, for which there was no requirement whatsoever, as stated by the respondents, he would have been selected in preference to those candidates.
The stand of the respondent that the categories referred to above form one cadre seems to be somewhat shaky in view of the orders of the Supreme Court quoted above.
As this point need not be gone into, I propose to give no finding on it but it does appear certain to me that the Board itself took the stand before the Supreme Court that there were separate vacancies for Assistant Engineers (Electrical) and Assistant Engineers (Mechanical).
In view of this stand, the case of the petitioner could not be jeopardised on account of filling up the vacancies from the quota of Assistant Engineers (Mechanical) which posts had not even been advertised.
Certain other aspects have been raised by Mr. Khehar, learned counsel for the petitioner.
He has asserted that the private respondents who had been selected had not studied Punjabi up to Matric standard and were, therefore, not entitled to selection and appointment.
However, in view of what has been stated above, I do not deem it appropriate to go into this question.
5.
The argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner that on the basis of the judgments cited by him he was entitled to selection is of no avail.
It is to be noted that the judgments cited above presuppose the existence of vacancies whereas the stand of the Board is that, in fact none existed amongst the general category and they had re-advertised the vacant posts in order to remove the imbalance which had been occasioned between the general and the reserved categories.
6.
In view of what has been stated above the present petition is allowed and a direction is issued to the Board to give appointment to the petitioner forthwith.
He shall be deemed to have been appointed from the date the last person from the list Annexure P4 was appointed.
He shall be allowed the benefit of service from that day in terms of seniority, etc., but there will be no order as to back wages.
No costs.
Petition allowed.