NC Jain, J - In this case which has been filed by the appellant-plaintiff himself the question involved is a short one.
The facts of the case giving rise to the filing of this appeal may be noticed in the first instance in order to appreciate the controversy between the parties.
2.
The plaintiff filed a suit by averring that he was appointed as a Clerk in November, 1961 and was subsequently promoted as Assistant in August, 1969.
He earned all increments and his work and conduct was found satisfactory throughout.
The plaintiff was communicated adverse vague remarks vide Memo Nos. CPH/E dated 3031970 for the period from 8.8.1969 to 3131970, 14366- PH/F-III dated 31.5.1971 and 32016-PH/F-III dated 30.6.1973 and 51899-PH/E dated 17.9.1974 which according to him were illegal, ultra vires and unconstitutional.
The aforesaid letters have been put in the service record, which according to him amounted to censure and therefore, the same was illegal and ultra vires.
It has further been pleaded by the plaintiff that Sarvshri Jagdish Singh, Randhir Singh and Kehar Singh.
were confirmed as Assistants on 321976 and Smt. Ranjit Kaur and Inderjit Sharma were confirmed, on 831976 and Harnek Singh was confirmed on 3181979.
The service record of the afore- mentioned persons was not good.
The plaintiff made a representation dated 2621976 but the same was rejected on 1231976.
The order of rejection as well as the order confirming the juniors was illegal and void.
On the basis so the afore-mentioned averments the plaintiff sought relief in the suit to the effect that he was entitled to selection grade treating his confirmation earlier to his juniors.
A decree was also claimed that the adverse remarks be held to be non-existent and that he was entitled to promotion above his juniors with all rights, benefits and privileges.
3.
The suit was defended by the defendants.
On the pleas of the parties the following issues were framed :  i.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the declaration as prayed?
OPP  ii.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to selection grade and confirmation above his juniors?
OPP  iii.
Whether the adverse remarks conveyed to the plaintiff have no effect upon his career?
OPP  iv.
Whether the suit is not maintainable?
OPD  v. Whether the plaintiff has no cause of action?
OPD  vi.
Whether the suit is not properly valued for the purposes of court fee and jurisdiction?
OPD  vii.
Whether the suit is time barred?
OPD  viii.
Whether this court has no jurisdiction?
OPD  ix.
Relief.
The trial court took up issue Nos. 1 to 3 together.
After examining the entire evidence, it was found that the plaintiff had been earning the annual grade increments regularly and he was allowed to cross efficiency bar.
It is further the finding of the trial court that adverse remarks were only to the effect that the plaintiff was a slow worker and he was asked to improve his work.
The trial court further found that the over all assessment of the work of the plaintiff was a satisfactory and it is written in his service record that he was fit to be promoted in accordance with his turn and seniority.
There was no reason for the defendants to withhold the confirmation of the plaintiff when his juniors were confirmed and that there was no reason for withholding the grant of selection grade at a time when his juniors were granted the same.
Adverse remarks according to the trial court were only advisory in a nature and did not in any way stand against him in his promotion.
All the orders passed by the defendants were found to be illegal.
The aforementioned issues were decided in favour of the plaintiff.
Under issues No. 4 and 5 the suit was found to be maintainable and the plaintiff was held to have a cause of action because his juniors were confirmed before him.
Issue Nos. 6 and 8 were given up.
Under Issue No. 7 the suit was held to be within time.
The trial Court consequently, granted a decree in favour of the plaintiff for a declaration to the effect that he was entitled to confirmation with effect from the date when his juniors were confirmed.
He was also held entitled to the selection grade from the date when his juniors were granted such selection grade.
The orders passed by the Chief Engineer vide letters dated 12379, 171079, 20679, 20179, 23.6.79 and 31.9.1982 were held to be illegal and invalid.
The plaintiff was held entitled to the privileges and arrears of pay and other benefits attached to the post which had accrued to him and which were likely to accrue in future.
The state of Punjab filed an appeal before the first appellate Court.
The first appellate Court after discussing the entire matter thoroughly came to the conclusion that the findings, recorded by the trial Court were correct.
4.
After confirming all the findings of the trial' court the appellate court partly allowed the appeal of the state with the observations that the trial court should not have passed a decree to the effect that the plaintiff stood confirmed and promoted.
According to the appellate court the trial court could only direct that the plaintiff would he considered for confirmations and when juniors to him were confirmed and that he would also be considered for the grant of the selection grade from the date when juniors to him were considered for selection grade and were awarded the same.
A decree on modification of the trial court's judgment was passed by the appellate court to the effect that the plaintiff is entitled to be considered for confirmation vis-a-vis his juniors as and when there was vacancy/were vacancies against which confirmation could be made and further he shall be considered of the award of selection grade vis-a-vis his juniors as and when there was vacancy.
It is also specified in the decree that while considering the plaintiff for confirmation and for the award of selection grade, the warning administered to him for having come late shall not be taken into account.
Aggrieved against the judgment and decree of the appellate court, the appellant has come up in this regular second appeal.
5.
It has been argued by the counsel for the appellant that when all the findings were recorded in favour of the plaintiff by the trial Court and the same were not upset by the appellate Court, the appellate Court had no jurisdiction to modify the decree of the trial Court.
6.
Having given my thoughtful consideration to the entire matter, I am of the view that the decree passed as such by the appellate court cannot be considered to be illegal.
It is quite true that all the findings on all the points have gone in favour of the plaintiff and consequently he is entitled to be confirmed with all the benefits claimed by him in the suit but at the same time no decree of the type passed by the trial court could be passed in law.
Even the appellate court has not reversed any finding of the trial court and the plaintiff is entitled to the full relief.
The appellate court has rightly observed that the plaintiff was entitled to be considered for confirmation.
The observations of the appellate court also virtually amounted to the granting of all the benefits but at the same time the terms in which the decree is couched cannot be open to any criticism.
Consequently, the appeal fails and is consequently dismissed.
7.
Before parting with the judgment, this court is constrained to observe that in spite of the fact that the judgment and decree of the appellate court has not been challenged before this court by way of filing an appeal, nothing was brought to my notice by the state's counsel about any action taken by the Government in pursuance of the decree of the appellate court, Such an inaction on the part of the Government has got to be deprecated with strongest words.
It is expected to of the government to give all the dues to its employees when they are found entitled to the same in the light of the observations made by the civil court.
Consequently while dismissing the appeal of the appellant this court is inclined to grant costs of the litigation which the appellant has to incur.
He is held entitled to payment of costs which this court quantifies at Rs5000/-.