RS Mongia, J - The Labour Court, Bathinda, vide its award dated 7th May, 1991 set aside the order of termination of the workman Girdhari Lal and ordered his reinstatement in service by the Management with continuity of service but back wages.
The Management i.e.
The Punjab State Electricity Board, Patiala hereinafter referred to as the petitioner) challenged the award by way of the present writ petition.
The Motion Bench while admitting the writ petition, had stayed the operation of the award.
2.
The respondent-workman filed Civil Misc.
Application No. 4202 of 1992 under section 17-B the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as the Act) in this writ petition, for directing the petitioner-Management to pay him he current wages during the pendency of the writ petition.
I had issued notice of the application to the counsel for the writ petitioner.
3.
I had asked the counsel for the parties if they were ready to argue the main case and had any objection to disposal of the main case itself instead of passing any orders in the Misc. application.
The counsel for the parties agreed that the main case itself be disposed of.
Consequently, I heard the arguments of the counsel for the parties.
4.
Briefly the facts of the case are that respondent Girdhari Lal was employed on work charged basis as a T. Mate with the petitioner in July, 1974.
There was a stipulation that the services of the workers in the Erection Division where the respondent had been employed were terminable on the completion/reduction of the work of erection of the Boiler.
According to the petitioner, since a part of the work of the erection of the Boiler had been completed by January 1976 and as there was a recession in the work of erection, a large number of employees had become surplus, it was decided to relieve 13 junior most.
T Mates.
A one month's notice dated 31st January, 1976 was served on the respondent alongwith some other workman.
The Accounts Officer of the Division was particularly directed to arrange the payment of the compensation before the expiry of the notice.
It has further been averred in the petition that Boiler Erection Division No 11, GNDTP Bathinda has since been abolished due to the completion of the erection work.
The respondent was also given compensation at the time of his retrenchment under Section 25-F of the Act.
It was in April, 1988 that respondent-Girdhari Lal sent a demand notice to the petitioner alleging that his services had been wrongly terminated without any notice charge-sheet, enquiry or compensation and that he should be reinstated in service.
A copy of the demand notice has been attached as Annexure P-3 with the writ petition.
5.
The State Government made a reference under section 10 of the Act on 31st May, 1989.
The dispute referred was "Whether termination of services of Shri Girdhari Lal workman is justified and in order?
If not, to what relief/exact amount of compensation is he/she entitled?"
6.
As observed earlier, the Labour Court set aside the termination order of the workman and ordered his reinstatement without back wages.
The Labour Court has observed that the termination of services of the workman was in violation of section 25-F of the Act.
At the time of his retrenchment respondent's total emoluments were Rs. 270-70 per month and at the time of his recruitment, his emoluments were Rs. 241-10 per month and he had worked for one year 7 months and B days.
The amount of compensation paid was less when calculated in terms of the provisions contained in Section 25-F of the Act.
It has been stated in petition that the compensation due to be paid to the petitioner under section 25-F of the Act was Rs. 230/- which was duly paid to him.
7.
The learned counsel for the petitioner argued that the respondent- workman was not entitled to any relief, because he did not raise any dispute for more than 12 years of his termination and it was only on 16th April, 1988 that a demand notice was sent by the respondent; whereas the termination took place in February, 1976.
According to the learned counsel, the delay on the part of the respondent in raising a dispute itself would disentitle him to claim any relief.
In support of his contention, the learned counsel cited two judgments of this court reported as Punjab State Electricity Board, Patiala v. Presiding Officer Labour Court, Bathinda and another, 1991(2) RSJ 560 : 1991(3) SCT 279 and Sirhind Co-operative Marketing-cum-Processing Society Ltd v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court and another, 1991(2) S.L.R.
487 : 1992(1) S.C.T.
311.
In the former authority, it was observed as under :  "I am also of the opinion that it is not open to the workman to raise a dispute at any time, nor it is for the State Government to refer a dispute at any time.
The State Government must see whether the claim put forth by a workman is belated and stale and whether there is some reasonable explanation for the delay.
Even the limitation for filling a civil suit is three years and in the present case, the claim application was filed after 10 years of the dismissal of the workman.
According to me, no such reference should have been made at such a belated stage."
In the latter authority, (i.e. 1991(2) S.L.R.
487), demand notice was served by the workman on the Management after about 7-1/2 years' of the termination, the Labour Court was not justified in ordering reinstatement of the workman and awarding wages from the date of the sending a demand notice.
According to the learned Judge, if there was such a delay in serving a demand notice, the workman was not entitled to any relief since he had slept over the matter for long years without furnishing any explanation for the delay.
8.
The learned counsel for the respondent-workman cited the Patiala Central Co-operative Band Ltd v. The Presiding Officer, Labour Court and another, 1990(5) S.L.R.
509 to contend that delay and laches cannot be a ground for striking downs a reference, which is an administrative action.
9.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties on the above point, I am of the view that there is considerable force in the argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
I am not called upon in this case to decide as to whether reference could be made by the Government at such a belated stage or not ?
I have my reservations on the observations made by the learned judge in the Patiala Central Cooperative Bank's case (supra) regarding the said issue.
In Sirhind Co-operative Marketing-cum-Processing Society's case (supra), the learned judge definitely held that the delay and laches on the part of the workman will disentitle him to any relief Even in the Patiala Central Cooperative Bank's case (supra) it was held by the learned judge that delay can be made a ground for refusal to grant back wages in case of reinstatement.
According to me, the delay can be fatal even if it is held that the termination was bad in law.
After all a workman cannot be put at a higher pedestal than an ordinary employee who has only three years limitation under the Limitation Act to challenge the order of termination in approaching the Management can be that in the meantime another workman might have been apointed or the Industry itself might have been closed down.
Under section 11-A of the Act, the Management can also prove the charges before a Labour Court but if the dispute is raised after such a long time, the Management may not be able to bring the evidence at such a belated stage.
Consequently, I am of the view that if there is no explanation for long delay in raising an industrial dispute with the Management the workman would disentitle himself to any relief.
10.
On merits also I find that the respondent-workman never raised any objection when he received the amount of compensation that the same was less by sum of Rs. 40/-.
Even in the demand notice, it is not the case of the respondent that the compensation paid was less.
Apart from that I have held in C.W.
No. 5696 of 1986 (Prem Chand v. The Presiding Officer, L C Chandigarh and another) decided on 25th January, 1991. that even if there may be any technical violation of section 25-F of the Act by the Management that would not in all cases entitle the workman to the relief of reinstatement unless a finding is also given by the Labour Court that the retrenchnient was not justified.
Take for instance that some employees in an establishment have really become surplus and the Management has justification in retrenching them.
However, while retrenching, the provisions of Section 25-F of the Act are not strictly complied with as few rupees are paid less as compensation.
Would under these circumstances reinstatement be the proper relief ?
According to me it would be too much to reinstate such a workman even though the retrenchment was justified.
Under these circumstances, some other relief like the compensation may be given depending upon the circumstances of the case.
11.
I have taken a view in the case of Punjab State Electricity Board, Patiala (supra) that if the writ petition is allowed and no order under section 17-B of the Act has been passed, the respondent-workman would not be entitled to any wages.
I had observed as under :  "The only question which remains to be decided is whether respondent-workman would be entitled to any wages from the date of the award till the decision of this case.
The Motion Bench had stayed the operation of the award.
The learned counsel for the workman submits that irrespective of the result of the writ petition, the workman is entitled to wages under Section 17-B of the Industrial Disputes Act from the date of the award till the decision of the writ petition.
I am afraid I cannot agree with this submission.
Once the operation of the award had been stayed and ultimately the writ petition is allowed, it cannot be taken that during the interregnum period the workman is deemed to have worked and is entitled to wages."
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is allowed and the award of the Labour Court dated 7th May, 1991 (Annexure P-6) is hereby set aside.
There will be no order as to costs.