BC Varma, CJ.
- The petitioners are judgment-debtors.
A decree has been passed in favour of the plaintiff-respondent Sham Nath.
The decree is in the following terms :  "It is hereby ordered that the suit is decreed against the defendants with costs for declaration to the effect that the show cause notice dated 131984 issued by the defendant No. 2 dispensing with the departmental enquiry and thus proposing the punishment of dismissal or taking any action in the form of termination of dismissal order subsequent to this show cause notice and order of dismissal dated 1831984 are illegal, unconstitutional and void and the plaintiff continues to be in service of the Police Department as Inspector of police and that he is entitled to all the benefits and privileges attached to this post to date."
The decree-holder inter alia claimed an amount of Rs.63,698/- towards his dues for which purpose, execution application was filed on May 2, 1986.
Similarly, a sum of Rs. 40,008.54 was claimed as pecuniary benefits accruing due to the decree-holder-respondent in terms of the decree.
On April 24,1987, the decree-holder made a statement that he had received Rs. 59,060.40.
The execution application was dismissed as partly satisfied.
The second execution application was filed on April 25, 1987.
In this application, apart from other claims, an amount of Rs24,03444 was claimed as interest.
The claim for interest was objected to and it was alleged that the decree does not include any direction to pay interest.
It was alleged that since the executing Court has to execute the decree as it stands, the amount claimed towards the interest could not be `awarded or directed to be paid by the judgment-debtors.
By the impugned order, the objection has been dismissed.
2.
Before this Court, in this revision petition, the principal contention raised by the learned counsel for the State of Punjab (the judgment-debtor) has been that since the executing Court cannot go behind a decree, which in the instant case, does not include any direction as to the payment of interest, the executing Court was not justified in directing payment of interest.
It was also urged that since in the first execution application the interest was not claimed, the subsequent claim in that behalf was barred by the rule of constructive res judicata which also applies to execution proceedings.
3.
The learned counsel for the petitioner, relied upon two decisions of this Court.
They are, Civil Revision Petition No. 558 of 1988 (State of Punjab v. Kartar Singh) decided on April 5,1989 and Civil Revision Petition No. 944 of 1987 (Dr. KG.
Chowdhri v. The State of Haryana), decided on July 25,1988, reported in 1989(1) SLR 194.
Both these decisions, apparently favour the stand taken by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
In both these decisions, the decrees, which were sought to be executed, were more or less in the same terms as runs in the decree in the instant case.
In execution of those decrees, interest was claimed.
The view taken is that by no stretch of imagination it could be said that the trial Court decreed the claim for payment of interest on arrears of salary and allowances.
4.
On the other hand, the learned counsel for the decree-holder-respondent cited the decision in State of Punjab v. Radha Ram, 1989(2) Recent Services Judgments 595.
The view in this decision is that the executing Court while calculating the relief of payment of money will have the same powers as a Court in a suit for payment of money.
Section 34 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 therefore empowers the Court to award interest on the particular amount adjudged at such rate as the Court deems reasonable from the date of the suit to the date of decree.
Further interest at such rate not exceeding six per cent per annum of such particular sum from the date of the decree to the date of payment of such earlier date as the Court thinks fit may also be awarded.
5.
All these are Single Bench decisions.
There appears to be apparent conflict of views which need to be resolved by a larger Bench.
The matter is, accordingly, referred to a large Bench.
The registry is directed to obtain necessary orders in this behalf.
Sd/-BC Varma  Chief Justice.
October 29, 1991  (Judgment dated 20.7.92 of Division Bench.)
GR Majithia, J - Whether the executing Court can allow interest to the decree-holder on the benefits allowed by a Civil Court in a declaratory suit is the principal question arising for determinatioin in this petition.
7.
The undisputed facts are that the trial judge gave the following relief by judgment dated February 26, 1986 in favour of the respondent :  "As a result of my findings on the issues discussed above, plaintiff succeeds and his suit is decreed against the defendants with costs for declaration of the effect that the show cause notice dated 1384 issued by defendant No. 2 dispensing with the departmental enquiry and thus proposing the punishment of dismissal or taking any action in the form of termination or dismissal order subsequent to this show cause notice and order of dismissal dated 18384 are illegal, unconstitutional and void and the plaintiff continues to be in service of the Police Department as Inspector of Police and that he is entitled to all the benefits and privileges attached to this post to date.
Decree sheet be prepared and the file be consigned to the Record Room."
The decree-holder took out execution, On April 24,1987, he received a sum of Rs. 59,060.40.
On the basis of the statement made by him on April 24, 1987, the execution application was dismissed as partly satisfied.
Second execution application was filed on April 25, 1987.
In this application, apart from other claims, an amount of Rs24,03448 was claimed as interest.
The claim for interest was objected to and it was alleged that the decree did not include any direction to pay interest.
It was also alleged that the executing Court had to execute the decree as it stood and that the amount claimed towards interest could not be awarded or directed to be paid by the judgment- debtor.
The executing Court dismissed the objection petition giving rise to this revision petition.
8.
The revision petition came up for hearing before Hon'ble the Chief Justice.
The learned Chief Justice noticed that in two Single Bench decisions i.e. Civil Revision No. 558 of 1988.
(State of Punjab v. Kartar Singh) decided on April 5,1989, and Civil Revision No. 944 of 1987 (Dr. KG.
Chowdhri v. The State of Haryana) decided on July 25, 1988, this Court had taken a view that the executing Court could not allow interest on the amount due in execution proceedings.
A discordant note was recorded by a learned single Judge in State of Punjab v. Radha Ram, 1988(2) R.S.J.
595.
In view of this conflict, the learned Chief Justice referred the matter to a larger Bench vide order dated October 29,1991.
That is how we are seized of the matter.
9.
The decree which was passed by the trial Judge did not contain any direction to pay interest.
In the execution proceedings, the decree holder claimed interest on the ground that the amount claimed by him was withheld by the petitioners and the decree-holder was entitle to claim interest.
The plea of the petitioner that the executing Court could not go beyond the decree was not examined by the executing Court and the executing Court allowed the claim of the decree-holder for payment of interest.
Aggrieved against this direction, the petitioners have come up in revision petition.
10.
The view taken by the executing Court cannot be sustained.
Indisputably, the executing Court cannot go beyond the decree.
It has to execute the decree as formulated by the Court passing it.
A relief which is not granted by the Court deciding the suit will be deemed to have been declined.
The executing Court cannot assume jurisdiction to grant interest by resorting to the provisions of Section 34 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
It does not empower the executing Court to grant interest in execution proceedings which has not been granted by the Court deciding the suit.
The matter has now been authoritatively settled by the apex Court in Civil Appeal arising out of S.L.P.
(C) No. 3116 of 1990 (State of Punjab and others v. Krishan Dayal Sharma), decided on August 27, 1990.
In that case, the plaintiff, after his retirement from the Police Department sought a declaration from the Civil Court that he was entitled to promotion as Deputy Superintendent of Police with effect from September 9, 1964.
The trial Court dismissed the suit, but, on appeal, the first appellate Court decreed the plaintiff's suit holding that he was entitled for promotion as Deputy Superintendent of Police with effect from September 9, 1964 and was also entitled to all benefits.
Rights and privileges which he would have drawn had he been promoted on September 9, 1964.
The decree attained finality.
In execution proceedings, the plaintiff claimed arrears of salary with effect from September 9, 1964 till his date of retirement, arrears of pension and other amounts.
In addition, he claimed compound interest @ 12% per annum on the amount found due to him.
The State of Punjab objected to the claim of the decree-holder for interest on the ground that the decree which was sought to be executed did not contain any direction for awarding interest to the decree holder.
The objection was repelled by the executing Court and the order was upheld in revision petition by this Court.
In appeal before the apex Court, the apex Court held that in the absence of any direction in the judgment or decree which was under execution, it was not open to the executing Court to award interest.
At this stage, it will be useful to reproduce the following observations of the apex Court :  "The Executing Court is bound by the terms of the decree, it cannot add or alter the decree on its notion of fairness or justice.
The right of the decree-holder to obtain relief is determined in accordance with the terms of the decree.
The Execution Court has referred to a number of decisions where interest had been granted on the arrears of salary and pension.
The Execution Court failed to appreciate that in those decisions directions for payment of interest had been issued by the Court while granting relief for reinstatement or payment of arrears of salary or pension.
None of those decisions relate to the grant of interest by the execution Court.
No doubt the Courts have power to award interest on the arrears of salary or pension or other amount to which a Government servant is found entitled having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case but that power cannot be exercised by the Execution Court in the absence of any direction in the decree.
In this view the executing Court in the instant case acted in excess of its jurisdiction in awarding interest to the respondentjudgment debtor."
In the light of this authoritative pronouncement, there is no escape from the conclusion that the decision rendered in State of Punjab v. Radha Ram and another, 1989(2) R.S.J.
595, cannot be sustained and the same is overruled.
The view taken in Civil Revision No. 558 of 1989 (State of Punjab v. Kartar Singh) decided on April 5,1989 and Civil Revision No. 944 of 1987 (Dr. KG.
Chowdhri v. The State of Haryana) decided on July 25, 1988 is affirmed.
For the reasons recorded above, the revision petition succeeds, the order of the executing Court to the extent that the respondent is entitled to interest @ 12% per annurn on the withheld payment of salary is quashed, but there will be no order as to costs.