RS Mongia, J (Oral) - The petitioner was offered a temporary post of Lady Instructor in the Maternity Child Welfare Centre, Talwara Township, in the pay of Rs. 4750 per mensem in the scale of Rs. 47-1/2-2-77-1/2.
This Centre was being run by the Beas Construction Board (In short BCB).
In the endorsement of the appointment letter, it was mentioned that the pay of the Lady Sewing Instructor was chargeable against the post of Lady Teacher as already approved by the General Manager, Beas Project, Talwara.
A copy of the appointment letter, dated 30th June, 1972 has been produced by the learned counsel for the petitioner, which has been placed on the record and marked `X' by me.
As a result of the completion of the works of Beas Project, the winding up of Civil (Irrigation) Wing commenced somewhere in April, 1984, and the employees working in the said Wing of the Beas Project under the BCB were rendered surplus.
The petitioner was one of them.
Vide letter dated 30th March, 1984, before the winding up process started, the petitioner was asked to give option by the Superintending Engineer, Beas Dam Circle, Talwara Township, whether she would like to be considered for recruitment in the Bhakra Beas Management Board (in short B.B.M.B) on the terms and conditions as were mentioned in the letter.
This option was asked for in view of the judgment of the Supreme Court in Jaswant Singh and others v. Union of India and others, A.I.R. 1980 SC 115, to which reference would be made hereinafter.
The petitioner gave her option to serve in the BBMB without prejudice to her legal rights.
Vide order, dated 27th May, 1984 of the BBMB (Annexure P-3), the petitioner was offered ( ad hoc) regular appointment of Lady Sewing Instructor against the post of lady Sewing Instructor at the initial pay of Rs. 400/- per month in the scale of Rs. 400- 600.
2.
One Smt. Santosh Kumari was appointed as a Sewing/Tailoring Teachress in the BCB somewhere in the year 1965 in the pay scale or Rs. 471-1/2 77-1/2 On the reorganisation of the State of Punjab on 1st November, 1966, she was allocated to the State of Punjab.
She made a claim from the BCB that her pay scale had not been revised as had been done, in case of other employees of the Punjab Government.
She filed a writ petition in this Court, being C.W.P.
No. 1416 of 1981.
The plea of the State Government for refusing the relief to Smt. Santosh Kumari was that she was only Middle pass, whereas the basic qualification for Sewing/Tailoring Teachress was Matric.
However, this plea did not find favour with the Bench hearing the petition and it was observed that once the qualification had been relaxed and Smt. Santosh Kumari had been appointed as a Sewing Teachress, she was entitled to have equality of treatment in matters relating to service including the revised grade of pay.
This judgment was rendered on 25th February, 1982.
When the work at the Beas Project had come to an end, Smt. Santosh Kumari continued her service with the BBMB, as a Sewing/Tailoring Teacheress.
In view of the judgment of this Court, Smt. Santosh Kumari started getting the same pay scale from the BCB and then from BBMB as was being given to the Sewing/Tailoring Teachress in the State of Punjab.
3.
The petitioner in the present writ petition claimed that when she was appointed by the BCB in the year 1972, there were only two posts of Sewing/Tailoring Teachress, at Talwara, where she was appointed.
One post was being held by Smt. Santosh Kumari and the other was given to her and since she was performing the same duties and functions as Smt. Santosh Kumari was performing as Sewing/Tailoring Teachress, she was entitled to the same revised pay scale as was given to Smt, Santosh Kumari.
It is further the case of the petitioner that her services should be treated to have continued with the BBMB and the order appointing her afresh was bad in law and in fact on her appointment with the BBMB as a Sewing Instructor vide order dated 27th May, 1984 (Annexure P3), she should have been given the same pay and also the same pay scale as was given to Smt. Santosh Kumari.
4.
Coming to the first grievance of the petitioner that the BCB should have paid her the same pay and the pay scale as was given to Smt. Santosh Kumari, the plea taken by the respondents is that the petitioner was never appointed as a Sewing/Tailoring Teachress but she was only appointed as a Lady Sewing Instructor, which was a totally different post than that of Sewing Teachress, which post was held by Smt. Santosh Kumari.
According to the learned counsel for the respondents, even the appointment letter, which has been produced and marked as `X', shows that in the year 1972, the petitioner was appointed as a Sewing Instructor against the post of a Sewing/Tailoring Teachress.
5.
The case of the petitioner is that in fact she was appointed as a Sewing Teachress as the pay scale in which she was appointed was that of a Sewing Teachress.
In fact there was no post of Sewing Instructor in the Centre where she was appointed and the different nomenclature would not make any difference.
Petitioner's counsel submitted that it cannot stand to reason that a person like Smt. Santosh Kumari who was just a middle pass could get more pay and could be fixed in a higher pay scale than the petitioner who was more qualified as she was Matriculate with Diploma in Sewing and Cutting course from the Council for Child Welfare, Nangal Township.
He further submitted that even if the petitioner was held to have been appointed as a Sewing Instructor, then the pay scale in the BCB for the Lady Tailoring Instructor was Rs. 170-350 for Diploma Holder and Rs. 125-300 for non-diploma holder.
Since, according to the petitioner, she was a Diploma Holder from a Government recognised Institution, she was entitled to the pay scale of Rs. 170-350 and in any case if she is held to be a non diploma holder, she was entitled to a pay scale of Rs. 125-350 and the BCB wrongly gave her the pay scale of Rs. 47-1/2-77-1/2.
6.
The learned counsel for the respondents submitted that the claim against the BCB cannot be entertained by this Court at this stage, because the employees of the BCB were the employees of the Central Government and any claim against the BCB can be entertained by the Central Administrative Tribunal and this case for the abovementioned relief should be transferred to the Central Administrative Tribunal at Chandigarh.
In support of this contention, be cited the Supreme Court judgment in Jaswant Singh's case (supra), wherein it was held that the employees of the BCB are to be treated as Central Government employees.
7.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties on this point, I am of the view that the argument of the learned counsel for the respondents must prevail.
The claim of the petitioner whether she is to be treated as Sewing Teachrcss or a Sewing Instructor and whether she is entitled to the same pay scale as was given to the Sewing Techresses in the Department to Smt. Santosh Kumari and whether she is entitled to the scale of Sewing Instructor which was granted by the BCB are in fact claims against the BCB and in view of the judgment of the Supreme Court in Jaswant Singh's case (supra) she being a Central Government employee, such reliefs, if available, can only be granted by the Central Administrative Tribunal.
All the points raised on this issue and the defence raised by the respondents can be gone into by the Central Administrative Tribunal.
8.
So far as the claim against the BBMB is concerned, that can be gone into by this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
It was held by the Supreme Court in Jaswant Singh's case (supra) that the employees who had been appointed by the BCB were not entitled to continuation in service after the completion of the Project under Section 80 of the Punjab Recognisation Act, 1966 (hereinafter referred to as the Act).
It was only that the erstwhile employees of the BBMB were saved under Section 79(4) of the Act.
In the case before the Supreme Court, the learned Solicitor General on behalf of the Government of India gave an assurance that while retrenching the employees of the BCB the `last come, first go' rule would be applied and further that as and when any direct recruitment is made to the post under the BBMB preference in those appointments would be given to the petitioners, i.e. the retrenched employees of the BCB In pursuance of the observations made in the judgment by the Supreme Court in Jaswant Singh's case (supra), the Central Government framed a Scheme to absorb the retrenched employees of the BCB to the extent of 50% of the post created or likely to be created in the BMB It was in furtherance of this policy that the petitioner had been asked to give option whether she would like to be' absorbed in the M.BMB  9.
Once it is held that petitioner had no right continue in the BCB after the work in the BCB had been completed and it was a by sheer concession that 50% of the surplus staff was to be absorbed by the BBMB there was nothing wrong in BBMB offering fresh appointments to surplus employees to BCB At the relevant time, the pay scale of the Sewing Instructor in the BBMB was Rs. 400-600, which was offered to the petitioner in the year 1984 when she was appointed as such by the BBMB The fresh appointment could be on fresh terms and no vested right flowed from her appointment with the BCB Though initially, even all the terminal benefits were paid by the BCB to all surplus employee and they were to have resigned from the posts from BCB, yet I have been told that vide order dated 22nd May, 1986, the service rendered by such employees like the petitioner in the BCB has been treated as service with the B.B.M.B, for the purpose of pay fixation, gratuity and other benefits flowing from the length of service and all such persons were asked to return the terminal benefits.
This would, however, not mean that such employees were to get the same pay scales as they might have been getting with the BCB It is to be appreciated that for the purpose of pay fixation etc., the BBMB has counted the service of such employees, which they had rendered with the BCB Consequently, I do not find any merit in the submissions of the learned counsel for the petitioner that her appointment with the BBMB was a continuous appointment and she was entitled to the same pay scale as a Sewing Teachress/Sewing Instructor, which she was entitled from the BCB  10.
It has further been brought to my notice the BBMB further introduced two pay scales, viz. Rs. 510-800 for those who are matriculates and Diploma holders from Government recognised Institutions and Rs. 400-600 for those who are simply Matriculates and do not have the qualifications of being Diploma holders.
The petitioner vide order dated 14th January, 1988 has been denied the pay scale admissible to a Diploma holder on the ground that he does not have Diploma from a Government recognised Institution.
The petitioner's counsel submits that the Diploma in Sewing and Cutting that the petitioner has is from a Government recognised Institution i.e. the Council for the Child welfare, Nangal Township, which is an Institution set up by the Bhakra Management Board itself.
I do not wish to go into this aspect in this writ petition at this stage whether the petitioner has a Government recognised Diploma or not and rather deem it appropriate for the petitioner to make a proper representation in that behalf to the concerned Authority and if such a representation is made within a period of one month from today, the respondents shall consider the same and pass an appropriate speaking order within a period of three months from the receipt of such a representation and in case it is held that the petitioner holds a Government recognised Diploma, then needless to say that she would be entitled to a pay scale of Rs. 510-800 from the date it was introduced for Diploma Holders and in that eventuality the arrears shall be paid within another two months from the passing of such order.
11.
Since regarding first claim I have held that this Court has no jurisdiction, the office is directed to transfer this case to the Central Administrative Tribunal, Chandigarh.
The parties through their counsel have been directed to appear before the Central Administrative Tribunal, Chandigarh on 21st September, 1992.
Since this Court is a Court of record and I have dealt with some reliefs claimed by the petitioner, the parties through their counsel are directed to file two complete copies of the paper books which they had already filed in this case, which would be transferred to the Central Administrative Tribunal, Chandigarh and the Central Administrative Tribunal is requested to treat such paper books to have been filed under the Central Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 for further action.
12.
The writ petition is disposed of in the above-said terms.
There will be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.