AS Nehra, J - This appeal is directed against the judgment dated 11.1.1990 passed by Additional District Judge, Jalandhar, by which the appeal filed by the plaintiff-appellant was dismissed and the judgment and decree dated 3151989 passed by Sub Judge 2nd Class, Jalandhar, (whereby the suit filed by the plaintif-appellant was dismissed) was upheld.
2.
The plaintiff-appellant instituted a suit for declaration on the following averments.
The plaintiff was employed as a Conductor in the Punjab Roadways, Depot No. 1, Jalandhar.
He was a civil servant and was entitled to the protection afforded under Article 311 of the Constitution of India and the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 (hereinafter referred to as the Rules).
On the basis of a false complaint made by the checking staff, he was placed under suspension and charge-sheeted on 761985 and in the charge-sheet he was accused of issuing less tickets to the tune of Rs. 20450 to the passengers travelling from Shah Talai to Kartar Pur, after having received appropriate fare from the passengers, while he was on duty as Conductor of Bus No. 2232 of 551985.
The charges were quite false and the charge-sheet was quite defective.
It was not accompanied by a copy of the complaint and the plaintiff was handicapped in preparing his defence.
However, the reply to the charge-sheet was submitted to the effect, that the plaintiff had proceeded on duty with the abovesaid bus on 451985 from Kartar Pur to Shah Talai.
While proceeding to Shah Talai, he had an attack of diarhoea and had also been vomitting throughout.
Anyhow, he reached Shah Talai.
At Shah Talai, he got himself treated from a doctor.
On 551985, through the plaintiff was not well because of ailment but still, in the interest of Roadways, the plaintiff accompanied the bus from Shah Talai to Kartar Pur.
He was extremely weak and semi-conscious.
No Adda-Conductor was on duty at that time at Shah Talai.
Anyhow, the plaintiff issued the tickets to the passengers in that state of physical and mental unfitness.
The bus left Shah Talai for Kartar Pur and when it reached near Una, he got the bus stopped and went to ease himself.
When the plaintiff returned, he found the Checking Staff present at the spot.
He even did not know whether the bus had been checked or not.
The Inspectors, after enquiring about his health, told him that the tickets of less value had been found with the passengers.
He explained to them to true position and also the fact that he was under great mental and physical agony because of his suffering from diarrhoea.
The Inspectors, thereafter, collected the way bill from the plaintiff.
In his presence, the Inspectors had neither checked the hus nor did not record the statement of any passagner.
The General Manager, with pre-biased mind, treated the explanation furnished by the plaintiff-appellant, as unsatisfactory and ordered an enquiry in a ritual manner and Shri RS Sharma was appointed an Enquiry Officer.
The Enquiry Officer acted with a pre-judged mind in the case, as he had been representing the Department in Courts of law regarding the cases against Conductors etc.
The enquiry was conducted in utter violation of principles of natural justice and the mandatory provisions of the Rules.
The plaintiff-appellant was not allowed to inspect the documents to prepare his defence and it had caused prejudice, as he was not allowed assistance of a co-woker and, as such, he could not defend himself properly.
After conducting the enquiry, the Enquiry Officer submitted the report against the plaintiff-appellant, holding him guilty of the charges levelled against him.
The findings of the Enquiry Officer were vitiated as the enquiry was conducted against the principles of natural justice and the mandatory provisions of the Rules.
The Enquiry Officer had acted in a partial manner.
The charge-sheet was vague and defective.
The findings were based upon no evidence and were based on conjectures and surmises.
The Enquiry Officer had failed to appreciate the fact that if the tickets for the value of Rs. 1095-50 could be issued by the plaintiff-appellant, then how he had not issued the remaining tickets.
Jai Singh and Piara Lal had not supported the case of the prosecution and still reliance was placed upon the statements of the Inspectors.
The reliance on the statements of the prosecution witnesses had been wrongly placed.
On the receipt of the enquiry report, the General Manager issued a show-cause notice on 941986 to the plaintiff-appellant, opposing the dismissal of the plaintiff-appellant from service.
The plaintiff-appellant relied to the said show-cause notice.
However, the General Manager imposed the penalty of dismissal upon the plaintiff-appellant, vide the impugned order dated 1071986.
The said order of termination of services of the plaintiff-appellant was illegal, arbitrary and against the principles of natural justice and the Rules, for the reasons enumerated in paragraph 14 of the plaint.
The appeal was preferred by the plaintiff-appellant to the Divisional Manager Transport, Jalandhar.
However, the same was also dismissed without due application of mind, vide order dated 29101987.
The said order of the Appellate Authority was also illegal, void and not binding on the plaintiff-appellant.
Notice under Section 80 of the Code of Civil Procedure was served upon the defendant but it remained unheeded to and as such the suit for declaration that the order dated 1071987 passed by the General Manager and the order dated 29101987 passed in appeal by the Divisional Manager Transport were illegal and the plaintiff-appellant continued to be in service of the defendant was instituted.
3.
Upon notice, the suit was resisted.
The factum of the service of the plaintiff-appellant, he being charge-sheeted, enquiry having been conducted, order of termination having been passed, were admitted.
However, it was pleaded that the enquiry was conducted in a legal manner by Shri RS Sharma, Enquiry Officer and the same was conducted according to the Rules; that the plaintiff-appellant had inspected all the relevant documents before the start of the enquiry; that, during the enquiry, he had never asked for assistance of a co-worker; that full opportunity to defend was given to the plaintiff-appellant in the course of the enquiry; and that the findings of the Enquiry Officer were based upon evidence.
4.
On the pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed :-  1.
Whether plaintiff is entitled to the declaration prayed for ?
2.
Relief.
5.
In order to prove his case, the appellant himself appeared as PW-1 and corroborated the averments made in the plaint.
He produced copy of notice Exhibit P-1, postal receipt Exhibit P-2, A.D. receipt Exhibit P-3 and closed his case.
The defendants-respondents, on the other hand, produced enquiry file Exhibits D-1 and D-2.
Upon consideration of the evidence, adduced by the parties, the trial Court decided issue No. 1 against the plaintiff-appellant and dismissed the suit with costs.
Aggrieved by the judgment and decree of the trial Court, the plaintiff-appellant filed appeal which was also dismissed by the Additional District Judge, Jalandhar.
6.
The learned counsel for the appellant has argued that the termination order dated 1071986 passed by the General Manager and the order dated 29101987 passed by the Appellate Authority are illegal, because the charge-sheet was vague and the documents relied upon by the General Manager were not supplied to the appellant.
It was further submitted that the finding of the Enquiry Officer was based on no evidence and the appellant was denied the assistance of a co-worker and the provisions of Rule 8 of the Punjab Civil Service (Punishment and Appeals) Rules have not been followed by the Enquiry Officer.
In support of his argument, he has placed reliance on State of Haryana v. Mohan Singh, 1985(2) SLR 116, and State of Haryana v. Ram Chander and others, 1976(2) SLR 690.
7.
Before coming to the arguments I may refer to the enquiry file Exhibit D-1.
Report dated 851983 (Exhibit P-1) of Inspector Ram Murti shows that on 551983, bus No. 2232-PJE was checked and an embezzlement of Rs. 20450 was found on account of issuing less tickets.
The appellant was charge-sheeted, vide order dated 761985, and he gave his reply on 1871985 stating therein that the charges against him were baseless and incorrect and that on 551985 he could not issue tickets in a right manner on account of his illness.
After considering the reply dated 1871985, the General Manager appointed Shri RS Sharma as Enquiry Officer.
The Enquiry officer examined Inspector Jagdish Rai, Chief Inspector Ram Murti, Driver Prem Pal and Jai Singh.
The appellant cross-examined them at length.
After going through the entire evidence, the Enquiry Officer came to the conclusion that the charges against the appellant have been proved.
After taking into consideration the enquiry report, the General Manager issued a show-cause notice on 1941986 for imposing a penalty of removal from service and forfeiture of suspension allowance.
After receiving the show-cause notice, the appellant gave his reply and he was given personal hearing.
On 1071986 the impugned order regarding dismissal and forfeiture of suspension allowance was passed.
The appeal of the appellant was also dismissed on 29101987.
8.
The Enquiry Officer wrote a letter to the appellant on 3101985, which is at page 307 of the enquiry file Exhibit D-1, that the appellant is entitled to the assistance of a co-worker during the enquiry.
On 30101985, the appellant appeared before the Enquiry Officer.
The Enquiry Officer explained the charges and informed the appellant that Shri Sukhcharanjit Singh has been appointed as a Presenting Officer and the appellant can seek the help of a co-worker to assist him during the enquiry.
Tarsem Lal appellant made a statement before the enquiry Officer that he would cross-examine the witnesses himself.
The appellant has signed the order dated 30101985 passed by the Enquiry Officer.
The plaintiff-appellant was specifically asked to get the assistance of a co-worker and he declined to take the help of a co-worker, before the Enquiry Officer on 30101985.
Therefore, there is no merit in the contention of the learned counsel for the appellant that the appellant was not allowed the assistance of a co-worker.
9.
A perusal of the enquiry file Exhibit D-1 shows that the Enquiry Officer examined four witnesses, namely, Inspector Jagdish Rai, Chief Inspector Ram Murti, Prem Pal (driver of the bus) and Jai Singh (one of the passengers) and the appellant admitted the factum of the bus having been checked.
The unpunched tickets and way-bills were taken away by the checking staff.
The Inspector, who had checked the bus at the time of checking of the bus, recorded the statement of Jai Singh passenger who was the leader of a group of 65 passengers and who had paid an amount of Rs. 1300/- to the appellant.
Therefore, the evidence of the two Inspectors, who had checked the bus in the presence of the Conductor (appellant), is sufficient to prove the guilt of the appellant.
The State of Haryana v. Mohan Singh (supra) relied upon by the learned counsel for the appellant is not applicable to the facts of the present case because, in that case, the Inspector had not recorded the statements of the passengers in the presence of the Conductor.
Therefore, it cannot be said to be a case of no evidence or hear-say evidence.
Ram Chander's case (supra) which has been relied upon by the counsel for the appellant does not support the case of the appellant.
Rather, the view taken by the Full Bench in Ram Chander's case (supra) supports the case of the defendants-respondents.
10.
The view which I have taken is fully supported by a Full Bench judgments of this Court in State of Haryana v. Ram Chander and others, 1976(2) SLR 690 and two Single Bench judgments reported as The State of Punjab v. Darshan Kumar, 1981(2) SLR 448, and Teja Singh v. Punjab State through Collector, Amritsar, 1988(1) SLR 105.
11.
The learned counsel for the respondents has argued that the allegations mentioned in the charge-sheet are not vague and the appellant was supplied all the documents by the Enquiry Officer.
From the perusal of the enquiry file Exhibit D-1, it is evident that the charge-sheet along with the summary of allegations, names of the witnesses and the list of the documents by which the charges were to be proved against the appellant, were duly served upon the appellant and he had replied the same.
The charge-sheet dated 761985 contains the signatures of the appellant, wherein he specifically wrote that he had received the charge-sheet etc.  12.
The appellant has assailed the findings of the Tribunal before the Civil Court and, in such a case, the jurisdiction of the civil court is quite limited to see the legality of the impugned order.
It cannot act as a court of appeal.
Its jurisdiction cannot be equated with the appellate jurisdiction and the Court cannot interfere with the findings of the Enquiry Officer or the competent authority, when these are not either arbitrary or utterly perverse.
The power to impose penalty on a delinquent official is conferred on the competent authority by an Act of Legislature or Rules made under Article 309 of the Constitution of India.
If there had been an enquiry consistent with the Rules and in accordance with the principles of natural justice, the punishment to be imposed is a matter exclusively within the jurisdiction of the competent authority.
If the penalty can be lawfully imposed by the competent authority on the grounds of proved mis-conduct, the Court has no power to interfere with the same.
Even the question of adequacy of penalty cannot be gone into by the Court unless it is mala fide.
In the instant case, the conclusions of the Enquiry officer and those of the punishing authority were based on legal and valid evidence and the impugned order cannot be set at naught even if some of the evidence was irrelevant or extraneous to the matter.
Rather, the entire evidence in this case was relevant and was sufficient to prove the guilt of the appellant.
The findings of the Enquiry Officer, resultantly, cannot be vitiated as being based upon no evidence.
13.
In view of the above-mentioned discussion, there is no merit in this appeal and, therefore, the same is dismissed with costs throughout.
Appeal dismissed.