RS Mongia, J (Oral) - The petitioner was appointed as a Prosecuting Sub-Inspector on 7th April, 1966 and was promoted as Assistant District Attorney (ADA-I) on 9th November, 1971.
Thereafter, he was promoted as District Attorney in the year 1977.
2.
The petitioner's father purchased through a registered sale-deed about 2 Kanlas of land in the name of the petitioner's minor sons Amandeep and Atma Parkash and petitioner's wife, on 17th February, 1986, from the Maharaja of Kapurthala (Shri Sukhjit Singh) through his general Attorney Shri Pritpal Singh.
3.
On 2nd May, 1986, one Banarasi Dass son of Shri Relu Ram filed a Civil Suit at Jullundur against Maharaja Sukhjit Singh for permanent injunction restraining the defendant from interfering in any manner in the peaceful and continuous possession of the plaintiff over the land measuring 32 Kanals 12 Marlas as entered in the Jamabandi for the year 1970-80.
The detail of Khasra Numbers was also given in the plaint.
On 14th June, 1986, the plaint was amended and the petitioner Balbir Singh Chandi was added as defendant No. 2 in the suit, wherein apart from the prayer already made in the unamended plaint, another prayer was made for mandatory injunction directing the defendants to demolish the construction raised in Khasra Nos. 32415/4977 and 21283/4987-4988 and to remove the Malba and their illegal and forcible possession in the suit land.
The defendants resisted the claim of the plaintiff and as far as petitioner Shri Balbir Singh Chandi is concerned, he had stated in the written statement that about 2 kanals of land had been purchased by his father from the Maharaja of Kapurthala on 17th February, 1986 in the names of his minor sons and his wife out of H.U.F.
funds and he himself was not the vendee.
It was in pursuance of the sale-deed that the lessee on the land i.e. Bakshi Ram brother of the plaintiff, who was in possession of the land represented by the sale-deeds, delivered the land to the vendees and a recital to that effect was also made in the sale-deed which was signed by the lessee Shri Bakshi Ram.
The stand of Maharaja was that he was the owner of the suit land and was in possession of the same through his tenant Shri Bakshi Ram.
After trial, he said suit was dismissed by the trial Court on 27th September, 1988.
However, the appeal of the plaintiff Banarasi Dass was accepted by the Appellant Court (i.e. the then Additional District Judge, Jullundur, Shri PK Jain) on 4th May, 1990.
The present petitioner filed Regular Second Appeal No. 1686 of 1990 against the judgment of the lower Appellate Court dated 4th May, 1990, in which apart from plaintiff Banarasi Dass, Maharaja Sukhjit Singh ws arrayed as respondent.
By a separate judgment of even date, I have accepted that Regular Second appeal and have restored the judgment of the trial court.
4.
It may be observed here that while disposing of the appeal, Shri PK Jain, the then Additional District Judge, Jullundur, passed certain strictures against the present petitioner, who was a respondent in the appeal before him.
During the course of his judgment, the following observations were made against the person of the petitioner :-  "The property is situated in the Municipal Corporation area of Jalandhar and if any construction was to be raised on the property, a map duly sanctioned from the Municipal Corporation, should be therein favour of defendant No. 2, however, no such map has been produced on the record.
Failure to prove such important document shows that the construction raised by defendant No. 2, was without any proper sanction from the Municipal Corporation, Jalandhar.
Such an act could have been committed by defendant/respondent No. 2, who was District Attorney at Jalandhar in those lays, speaks of the fact that he had, by taking law in his own hands, entered into forcible possession of part of the property."
"In order to prove Exs.
D1 and D2, Shri Balbir Singh Chandi appeared as DW1.
Shri Chandi DW1 being the District Attorney at Jalandhar was fully conversant with the fact that the sale deed of a property in Jalandhar could not have been effected without getting the sanction from the Collector.
DW1 Shri Balbir Singh Chandi, was fully conversant with the provisions of Urban Land (Ceiling and Regulation) Act, 1976.
He being fully conversant with the legal cables and acrobatics, devised a novel method to get the sale deed of the property executed at Kapurthala."
"The sudden change in the revenue entries in the column of ownership in favour of Maharaja speaks of the fact that the hands of the defendants are smudged one."
5.
After the judgment of the Appellate Court, the petitioner was served with a charge-sheet vide letter dated 9th August, 1990, a copy of which has been attached as Annexure P-3 to the writ petition.
The charge-sheet reads as under :-  "While working as District Attorney, Jalandhar from 17.6.1986 to 1381987 and Deputy Director Prosecution and Under Secretary from 27th April, 1988 to date, Sh. BS Chandi committed the following acts of omission and commission for which he is charged as under :- 1.
That he misused his official position, while he remained posted as District Attorney at Jalandhar by purchasing the landed property in favour of his wife illegally in the Municipal Corporation area at Jalandhar as held in the judgment dated 451990 by Sh. PK Jain, PCS, Addl.
District Judge, Jalandhar.
Thus he acted in such a manner which is unbecoming of a Govt. employee.
2.
While purchasing the aforementioned property he violated the provisions of Rule 16(2) of the Punjab Govt.
Employee (Conduct) Rules, 1966.
3.
That he got the leave sanctioned for the period from 1071990 to 2071990 from Director Prosecution without getting permission to leave station and giving address for correspondence.
4.
That his leave for the above period was rejected by the Director prosecution on 1371990, but he did not resume duty upto 2071990.
5.
That he was appointed as public prosecutor by the Govt. to defend the case before the Randev Commission vide orders dated 12790 but he did not turn up before the commission on 17790.
2.
The above lapses on the part of Sh. BS Chand constitute grave mis-conduct and dereliction of duty rendering him liable to disciplinary action."
The above charge-sheet was accompanied by statement of allegations as well.
The above said charges were sought to be proved by the documentary as well as by oral evidence.
The list of documents which was attached to the charge-sheet shows the following documents were to be relied upon by the department for proving the charges against the petitioner :-  "1.
Judgment dated 451990 by Sh. PK Jain, PCS, Addl.
District Judge, Jalandhar.
2.
Leave application, of Sh. BS Chandi, Deputy Director Prosecution and Under Secretary.
3.
Orders dated 1371990 from Director Prosecution rejecting the leave of Sh. PS Chandi, Deputy Director Prosecution and Under Secretary.
4.
Orders dated 12.7.1990 regarding appointment of Sh. BS Chandi Deputy Director Prosecution and Under Secretary as Public Prosecutor to defend the case on behalf of the Government and Police Deptt.
before Sh. HL Randev, Commissioner of Court in W.P. No. 400-407 of 1989 Parkash Kaur and others in addition to his own duties.
5.
Report of Sh. Subash Chand, Peon.
6.
Report of Sh. Nirmal Singh, Senior Scale Stenographer, to Director Prosecution, Punjab, Chandigarh."
On 7th September, 1990 (Annexure P-8) the petitioner submitted his reply to the charge-sheet.
However, the petitioner was placed under suspension vide order dated 10th September, 1990, with immediate effect.
On 21st September, 1990, the present writ petition was filed, inter-alia, praying that the charge-sheet, Annexure P-3 and order of suspension, Annexure P-13, and all further proceedings initiated in pursuance of the charge-sheet be quashed.
The Motion Bench on 21st October, 1991, admitted the writ petition and the operation of Annexure P-3 charge-sheet, Annexure P-13 the order of suspension and the proceedings taken pursuant thereto were ordered to be stayed during the pendency of the writ petition and further the writ petition was ordered to be put up along with RSA.
No. 1686 of 1990.
6.
I have heard both the RSA.
as well as writ petition together.
The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that as far as Charge No. 1 is concerned, the sole basis of the same is the judgment of the Additional District Judge, Jullundur, dated 4th May, 1990, by which the appeal of Banarsi Dass was allowed and against which an appeal RSA.
No. 1686 of 1990 have been filed.
According to the learned counsel, if the Regular Second Appeal was to be allowed and also the remarks/strictures passed by the Additional District Judge, Jullundur, were held to be without any basis and wholly uncalled for, charge No. 1 would fall to the ground.
According to him, but for the said judgment, there was no occasion with the respondents to level the allegations contained in Charge No. 1.
The argument of the learned counsel proceeded that if on the admitted facts of the case on the record, there is no material whatsoever to charge-sheet an employee and rather the material on the record shows otherwise this Court should interfere at the stage of charge-sheet itself, otherwise it would amount to misuse of the process of the Court and unnecessary harassment and demoralisation of a Government servant.
Further, according to the learned counsel, there are sufficient grounds on the record to show as well as according to the written statement filed by the respondents that there is no material whatsoever on the basis of which, charge-sheet could have been framed against the petitioner, and, in fact, there is sufficient material on the record to show that the charge-sheet itself is baseless.
7.
On the other hand, Mr. DS Walia, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent, did not seriously dispute the proposition as propounded by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
He submitted that normally the Courts would be slow to interfere at the stage of the charge-sheet and if on the face of the record, a Court comes to the conclusion that there is no material whatsoever on the basis of which a charge-sheet can be framed against an employee or the material shows that the charge-sheet itself is wholly baseless, then the Court should come to the rescue of the alleged delinquent official and save him from the harassment that he might have to undergo if the process of departmental enquiry is allowed to continue.
It is the stand of the respondents in the written statement that charge No. 1 is solely based on the judgment of the Additional District Judge, Shri PK Jain, dated 4th May, 1990 and apart from it, there is no other material in support of the allegations contained in Charge No. 1.
Even in the list of documents relied by the prosecution, the only reliance is on this document.
Since I have allowed the Regular Second Appeal by my judgment of even date and have held that the remarks/strictures passed against the petitioner by the Additional District Judge were wholly baseless and uncalled for in the circumstances of the case, no occasion arises for the respondents to continue the enquiry as far as Charge No. 1 is concerned.
8.
As far as Charge No. 2 is concerned, it seems that while framing the charge-sheet, no notice was taken of the fact that the petitioner had vide letter dated 13th March, 1986 (copy Annexure P.1) informed the Legal Remembrancer-cum-Director, Prosecution, who was the then Head of the Department of the petitioner, regarding the purchase of the property by his father in the name of his minor sons and his wife.
It was further mentioned that the entire amount had been spent by his father.
Vide letter dated 16th April, 1986 (copy Annexure P2) Legal Remembrancer-cum-Director Prosecution, further informed the Home Secretary to Government, Punjab, that as required under Rule 18(2) of the Punjab Employees' Conduct Rules, 1966, as intimation regarding the purchase of property was being sent for information.
It may be highlighted here that at a later stage in 1989, petitioner sought permission from the department that his father, the Karta of the family wanted to purchase about 8 Kanals of land for his grand-children.
The Legal Remembrancer-cum-Director Prosecution informed the Financial Commissioner Home and Secretary to Government, Punjab, vide letter dated 16th January, 1990 (Annexure P.19) that since the purchase of the land was being made in the names of the family members by the father of the petitioner, no permission for such a purchase was required.
Only an information to that effect was sufficient.
In the light of these facts, as culled out above, it would be seen that there is no violation of any of the provisions of the Conduct Rules.
It may be observed here that the receipt of letters, Annexures P-1 and P-2, is an admitted fact on behalf of the respondents.
In my considered view, the question of proceeding with the enquiry on Charge No. 2 also does not arise.
9.
As far as Charges No. 3, 4 and 5 are concerned, these can be dealt with together.
Vide Communication dated 9th July, 1990 (Annexure P-5), the competent authority granted 11 days' earned leave to the petitioner for the period from 10790 to 20.7.90 with permission to suffix from 21790 to 22.7.90.
It is further mentioned in this communication that the petitioner was likely to join after the expiry of his leave, at Chandigarh.
On 13th July, 1990 (Annexure P.6) same authority which had granted leave, cancelled the leave with immediate effect, i.e. 1371990.
The said communication was sent to the petitioner at his Chandigarh address.
It was further mentioned in the communication that he is directed to appear before the Commissioner of Court, who was enquiring into the allegations levelled in CWP Nos. 466 and 467 of 1989.
It is inherent in the communications sanctioning the leave that the petitioner had asked to go out of station inasmuch as it is mentioned in the communication sanctioning leave that after the expiry of the leave, the petitioner would joint at Chandigarh meaning thereby that during the leave he would not be in Chandigarh.
In Charge No. 4 it is mentioned that the leave of the petitioner was rejected.
In fact, the leave was never rejected and after the grant of the leave on 9th July, 1990, from 1071990, to 2071990, the same was cancelled on 13th July, 1990 with effect from that date.
The leave was never rejected.
It was due to the cancellation of the leave that the petitioner was asked to appear before the Commissioner of Court which was enquiring into some of the allegations levelled in CWP Nos. 466 and 467 of 1989.
The learned counsel for the respondents has conceded that there is nothing on the record to show that the cancellation of the leave was ever intimated to the petitioner.
The only averment is that this letter was taken to his house in Chandigarh where he was not found.
If there is no evidence in possession of the respondents that the factum of cancellation of leave was conveyed to the petitioner, the question of his resuming duty immediately after 13th July, 1990, did not arise.
He would have resumed duty only on the expiry of the original sanctioned leave.
Same reasoning would apply to Charge No. 5.
If no intimation was sent to the petitioner regarding the cancellation of leave and directing him to appear before the Commissioner of Court to assist in the enquiry being conducted by it, he could not have presented himself there.
10.
From the discussion above, it would be evident that there is no material whatsoever in possession of the respondents, on the basis of which charge-sheet could be framed and rather the material on the record goes to show that the charge-sheet is not well founded and is against the record.
For the reasons recorded above, I allow this writ petition and quash charge sheet, Annexure.
P-3, as also suspension order, Annexure P-13.
However, I make no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.