Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The Management is aggrieved by the ex-parte award given by the learned Labour Court.
A few facts relevant for the decision of the controversy may be noticed.
2.
Respondent No. 3 was appointed as a Salesman on February 1, 1983.
On April 18, 1984, he was given one month's notice.
As a result his services were terminated.
On September 12, 1986, the dispute regarding the validity of the order of termination was referred to the learned Labour Court.
Notice of the claim was given to the petitioner-Management.
The parties completed the pleadings by March 9, 1987.
The case was fixed for March 9, 1987, when on account of a resolution by the member of the Bar to abstain from work, counsel for the petitioner could not appear.
The Labour Court ordered exparte proceedings and adjourned the case for the evidence of the workman to April 13, 1987.
A copy of this order is on the record as Annexure P/1/A Even on April 13, 1987, the Bar resolved to abstain from work.
As a result, it appears that nobody appeared on behalf of the petitioner.
The statement of the workman was recorded by the learned Labour Court.
It closed his evidence.
The case was adjourned to May 11, 1987.
A copy of the order passed by the learned Labour Court on April 13, 1987 is at Annexure P4/A  3.
The petitioner avers that on coming to know of the order regarding ex-parte proceedings, an application, a copy of which has been produced on record as Annexure P2, was sent by registered post to the Presiding Officer of the Labour Court.
However, later on it was discovered that the copy was not on the file of the case and, therefore an application was filed on July 20, 1987.
A copy of this application is on the file at Annexure P.3.
The learned Labour Court was pleased to direct the issue of notice to the workman for August 10, 1987.
On August 10, the case was adjourned to September 3, 1987.
As the State Government had not issued the requisite notification empowering the learned Judge to hear the pending cases, the case was further adjourned to October 13, 1987.
The petitioner maintains that on October 13, 1987, the case was adjourned.
The learned counsel for the petitioner, who was attending to the proceedings before the learned Labour Court and has filed a personal affidavit in the case, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P4, has averred that the counsel for the workman had informed him that the case had been adjourned to December 11, 1987.
On this basis, the noted that date.
Actually it appears to have been adjourned to October 26, 1987, when the impugned award, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P1, was passed.
Aggrieved by this award, the Management has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
4.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the workman.
It has been inter alia averred that no principle of natural justice was violated by the learned Labour Court.
According to the respondent, the case was called on March 9, 1987 many times and since none had appeared on behalf of the Management, the Court had validly passed the order for ex-parte proceedings.
The averment that the application for setting aside exparte proceedings was moved has been admitted.
It has also been admitted that another application had been filed on July 20, 1987.
5.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and perusing the record, I find that the petitioner had engaged two counsel for the defending the case.
On account of the resolutions of the Bar to abstain from work, the learned counsel could not appear on two dates of hearing, viz March 9, 1987 and April 13, 1987.
As a result, exparte proceedings were taken against the petitioner.
The entire evidence was recorded in the absence of the petitioner.
Ultimately, even the award was given when counsel for the petitioner could not appear.
6.
The party which has engaged a counsel cannot be made to suffer if the counsel fails to put in appearance on account of the resolution of the Bar.
The petitioner was unable to lead the evidence and prove the necessary facts only on account of the absence of his lawyer.
In such a situation, it does not appear to be just and fair to burden the petitioner with any liability without being given a due and a reasonable opportunity.
7.
Taking the totality of circumstances into consideration, it appears appropriate to set aside the impugned award dated October 26, 1987, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P.1.
The case is remanded back to the learned Labour Court.
It would give the parties a due and a reasonable opportunity to lead evidence and decide the matter afresh.
In the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bar heir own costs.
Petition allowed.