Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - In this Writ Petition filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India the State of Haryana has prayed for quashing the award of the Labour Court, Rohtak.
2.
The brief facts of the case are that the services of Shri Hans Raj, workman, respondent No. 2, who was serving as an Electrician in Haryana Roadways, Gurgaon were terminated vide order dated 22.4.1971 w.e.f.
10121970.
The workman challenged the order of termination by filing a Civil Suit in the Court of Sub Judge, Gurgaon which was decreed in his favour vide judgment dated 28th August, 1975.
The State of Haryana preferred an appeal against the judgment and decree of the trial Court in the Court of Additional District and Sessions Judge, Gurgaon, who while dismissing the appeal, held as under :-  "It is still open to the appellant to serve the show cause notice upon the respondent and to hold the enquiry into the alleged misconduct against him if that course is considered feasible at this stage.
It is also left open to Haryana State to decide the question of grant of salary to the respondent for the period in question."
In the light of the aforesaid judgment, petitioner No. 2 i.e. General Manager, Haryana Roadways, Gurgaon had issued an order dated 541978, copy Annexure P-3, to the writ petition whereby the period during which the workman remained out of service from 10121970 to 26.7.1976 was to treated as without pay.
Thereafter, the workman filed an application under Section 33(c)(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, hereinafter referred to as the 'Act', before the Labour Court, Rohtak, for computation of his wages for the period 10121970 to 2571976 which period was ordered to be treated as without pay (Annexure P-3 refers).
The matter before the Labour Court was contested by the Management on the ground that the workman had no existing right to claim computation of his wages for the period 10121970 to 2571976 which was ordered to be treated as without pay.
As such, application under Section 33(c)(2) of the Act was not maintainable.
3.
The Labour Court framed the following issues :-  1) Whether in view of the judgment of the Civil Court, the workman has no existing right ?
2) Whether the order of the General Manager dated 5478 is legal and binding on the workman and he is not entitled to receive his salary for the period in dispute.
3) If issues No. 1 and 2 not proved to what amount workman is entitled to in terms of money computation ?
Issues No. 1 & 2 were tried as preliminary issues and the same were decided against the Management by the Labour Court vide its award dated 15111979.
4.
As mentioned above, the workman preferred petition under Section 33(c)(2) of the Act and claimed wages from 10121970 to 2671876.
The claim of the workman was resisted by the management on the ground that the dispute did not fall within the purview of Section 33(C)(2) of the Act.
However, the Labour Court overruled this objection and came to the conclusion that the workman was entitled to the wages for the termination period.
On facts, it was noted by the Labour Court that the Additional District Judge had left to the Haryana State to decide the question of the grant of salary to the workman and therefore the order passed by the General Manager, Haryana Roadways, cannot be said to have been passed by the State Government in pursuance of the directions given by the Additional District Judge.
The impugned order thus passed by the General Manager Haryana Roadways was void ab-initio.
5.
I have considered the submissions made at the Bar and am of the view that the Labour Court has gone wrong in coming to the conclusion referred to above.
The appeal was filed by the Haryana State through General Manager.
As such the General Manager Haryana Roadways, Gurgaon, was acting on behalf of the State and therefore, the order copy Annexure P-3 passed by him could not be said to be an order which was void-ab-initio.
Therefore, the reason given by the Labour Court by holding that the order passed by the General Manager is illegal cannot be sustained.
6.
Apart from this, it is well settled that proceedings under Section 33-C(2) of the Act are in the nature of execution proceedings and therefore unless and until there is an order, which is required to be implemented on the basis of which some right accrues in favour of the workman, there cannot be any adjudication under Section 33(C)(2) of the Act.
7.
This view was given by the Supreme Court in The Bombay Gas Co Ltd v. Gopal Bhiva and others, 1964 SC 752 in which it was mentioned that proceedings contemplated under Section 33-C(2) of the Act are also execution proceedings and the Labour Court can compute in terms of money the benefit claimed by an employee.
Thus the existence of some order/award is a condition precedent under Section 33-C(2) of the Act.
As indicated above, the Labour Court has tried to assume jurisdiction by holding that the order passed by the General Manager was void ad initio because the order could be passed by the Haryana Govt. as already stated, the litigation by the State was through the General Manager.
As such the General Manager was competent to pass the order copy Annexure P-3 to the writ petition.
In view of the above observation, the order dated 541978, Annexure P-3, remains in operation.
Therefore, the respondent-workman is not entitled to any benefit.
The Labour Court has relied upon the decision of the Supreme Court in M/s Punjab Beverages Pvt. Ltd. Chandigarh v. Suresh Chand & another, AIR 1978 SC 995.
This decision is not applicable to the facts of the present case.
There it was observed by the Supreme Court that the provisions of Section 33-C(2) of the Act does not render the order of discharge/dismissal ineffective or in operative.
The above observation would help the petitioner rather than the workman.
In view of the foregoing discussion, this writ petition is allowed and order dated 15111979 Annexure P4 is quashed.
Parties to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.