GR Majithia, J - The plaintiff has dome up in regular second.
appeal against the judgment and decree of the Wrist Appellate Court partly modifying the decree of the trial Judge.
2.
The facts :  The defendant-respondent appointed, the plaintiff-appellant as a Manager Incharge of the Printing Press with effect from March 1, 1958 at a salary of Rs. 150/- per month; that he was to remain on probation for six months; that after completion of the probation period, the salary a to be raised to Rs. 250/- per month that the plaintiff AM was confirmed with effect from March 1, I with benefits of provident fund etc.; that the plaintiff worked as Branch Manager till May 13, 1962 when the services of the employees of the Press were retrenched, but the plaintiff was allowed to continue; that the services of the plaintiff were terminated with one month's notice with effect from April 8, 1964 without assigning any reason and that since the plaintiff continued to be in the service of the bank, he levied claim of Rs. 924979. as arrears of salary etc.
In the alternative he also claimed Rs. 4880/- by way of damages for illegal termination of the, service and Rs. 436979 on account of gratuity, earned leave, provident fund, allowance etc.
He also challenged Rule 17(1) of the Service Rules framed by he Registrar Cooperative Societies, under which the purported action was taken was invalid.
3.
The defendant denied the allegations and justified the order of termination.
4 The pleadings of the parties gave rise to the following issues :-  (1) Whether the plaintiff was entitled to the benefit of Provident Fund etc. ?
OPP (2) What are the duties of the plaintiff after the retrenchment of the Press staff and with what effect ?
OPP (3) Whether the services of the plaintiff were terminated under the circumstances as alleged in para No. 6 of the plaint ?
If so, what is its effect ?
OPP (4) Whether the termination of the services of the plaintiff is wrongful, illegal, ultra vires and mala fide for the reasons an grounds stated in para No. 7 sub-paras (i) to (iv) and para No. 8 sub-paras (i) to (vi) of the plaint ?
OPP (5) Whether the resolution No. 25 dated 841964 is bad, and illegal, wrongful and mala fide and beyond the powers of the Directors alleged ?
OPP (6) Whether the resolution No. 25 dated 8.4.64 referred to above was passed under threat, influence and pressure as alleged in para No. 9 of the plaint ?
OPP (7) Whether the plaintiff is entitled to gratuity earned leave wages, overtime-allowance and bonus ?
OPP (8) Whether the plaintiff is entitled to declaration that he is still in service of the defendant ?
(9) If issue No. 8 is not proved but issues No. 4, 5 or 6 are proved, to what at amount of damage is the plaintiff entitled ?
OPP (10) Whether the defendant is entitled to retain the admitted amount till the audit objections have been completed ?
OPD  (11) Whether the claim of bonus and the suit is within time ?
(12) Relief.
5.
Additional issue was framed after the defendant filed the amended written statement and the same reads thus :  1A.
Whether the jurisdiction of Civil Court is barred as alleged in the additional plea of the written statement ?
OPD  6.
The trial Judge under issue No. 1-A held that the jurisdiction of the Civil Court was not barred and issue No. 1-A was decided in favour of the plaintiff; issue No. 2 was decided in favour of the plaintiff and it was held that the plaintiff had been prosecuting the case on behalf of the defendant against the retrenched employees; issue Nos. 3 and 6 were decided against the plaintiff; issue Nos. 4 and 5 were disposed of together and it was held that termination of the services of the plaintiff was illegal and he was entitled to pay for the unexpired portion of his service; issue No. 7 was partly decided against the plaintiff and it was held that he was not entitled to bonus; issue No. 8 was decided against the plaintiff and it was held that he was not entitled to declaration that he was still in service; issue No. 9 was decided in favour of the plaintiff and it was held that he was entitled to Rs. 4880/- as damages on account of loss of salary; issue No. 10 was decided against the defendant and it was held that it was not entitled to retain the amount due to the plaintiff and issue No. 11 was held to be redundant.
In the ultimate analysis, the trial Judge held that the resolution dated April 8, 1964 vide which the service of the plaintiff was terminated was illegal and a decree or recovery of Rs. 7802,50, detailed as under, was passed in favour of the plaintiff and against the defendant.
(a) Damages on account of loss of salary.
Rs. 4888000 (b) Earned leave wages for 4 months.
Rs. 70000 (c) RE with interest Rs. 141800 (d) Arrears of salary for 9 days from 151964 to 9.5,1964 Rs. 54.50 (e) Security deposit with interest.
Rs. 75000 Total Rs. 780250.
7.
The defendant challenged the decree of the trial Judge in first appeal and the plaintiff filed cross-objections challenging the decree of the trial Judge to the extent the relief claimed by him was denied.
The First Appellate Court held that the Civil Court had jurisdiction to entertain the suit and the jurisdiction of the civil Court was not barred by virtue of Section 2-A of the Industrial Disputes Act and also by virtue of Section 55 of the Punjab Co- operative Societies Act.
The First Appellate Court further held that procedure for the termination of the services of the permanent employees had not been provided for in the Rules and the bye-laws of the defendant society and the termination from service was not within the scope of the powers of the Board of Directors.
It found that the claim for bonus was wrongly denied by the trial Judge and held that the plaintiff was entitled to bonus in the sum of Rs. 875/-.
It, however, reversed the decree of the trial Court to the extent to which it has allowed the claim of the plaintiff for Rs. 700/- for his unavailed of four months earned leave.
In coming to the conclusion it took note of the fact that there was no provision under the Rules under which the plaintiff was entitled to the benefit of unavailed four months earned leave.
On the ultimate analysis, the First Appellate Court allowed the appeal of the defendant and disallowed the claim for the recovery of Rs. 700/- claimed as unavailed of earned leave.
It, however, allowed the cross-objection to the extent of Rs. 700/- towards unavailed earned leave.
8.
I have gone through the judgment of the First Appellate Court.
The First Appellate Court was in error in observing that the termination of the services is not covered by the service rules.
The rule has not to be literally construed.
If the employer has a right to dismiss, it has also got a right to terminate the services provided it follows the rules of natural justice before passing the order.
However, I am not inclined to express any final opinion on this aspect of the matter since the defendant has not challenged the judgment and decree of the First Appellate Court either by way of appeal or by way of cross-objections.
Having gone through the judgment of the First Appellate Court, I do not find any ground to differ with the overall conclusion arrived at by it.
The appeal is devoid of any merit.
9.
For the reasons stated above, the appeal fails and is dismissed, but with no orders as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.