NK Kapoor, J - This is plaintiff's regular second appeal against the judgment and decrees of the Courts below by which his suit for declaration that order of dismissal dated 2721975 passed by the Superintendent, Post Office, Hoshiarpur being illegal and void, was dismissed.
2.
Brief facts of the case are that the plaintiff was a postal clerk at Hamirpur post office, District Kangra, and was dismissed by Superintendent of Post Offices, Hoshiarpur, vide order dated 2721975.
This order of dismissal was challenged by the plaintiff on the ground that the same was passed at his back without giving him any opportunity of placing his view point.
Plaintiff further contended that he could not be dismissed without serving him with a charge-sheet and thus, his dismissal is wholly illegal and void.
3.
Defendants put in appearance and filed a written statement controverting all the averments made in the plaint.
4.
On the pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed :  1.
Whether the impugned dismissal order dated 2721975 is liable to be set aside as alleged ?
OPP  2.
Whether valid notice under section 80 CPC has been served ?
OPP 3.
Relief.
5.
Trial Court decided issue No. 1 against the plaintiff; that since plaintiff was convicted by a Criminal Court, though released by the Appellate Court under Probation of Offenders Act yet his retention in service is not undesirable.
Trial Court found no infirmity in the order of dismissal dated 2721975.
Issue No. 2 was decided in favour of the plaintiff.
In view of the findings of the trial Court under Issue No. 1, the suit of plaintiff as dismissed with costs.
The Appellate Court without examining the matter on its merit, dismissed the appeal on the solitary ground that the appellate order dated 6101975 (though exhibited as P-3/1) had not been challenged in the suit and this way no effective decree can be passed even if the arguments of the learned counsel for the appellant prevailed.
The appellant besides challenging the judgment and decrees of the Courts below; filed an application under Order 6 Rule 17 read with Section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure, seeking amendment of the plaint, which was ordered to be heard alongwith the appeal.
6.
Appellant vide his application under Order 6 Rule 17 has made a prayer for amendment of the plaint so that order dated 6101976, passed by the Director, Postal Services, Ambala, be also challenged.
The appellant has further stated that order of Director dated 6101976 is already on the file and exhibited as exhibit P-3/A.
It is further stated that no fresh evidence is to be led by the plaintiff.
The appellant thus, prayed that this application seeking amendment of the plaint be granted in the interest of justice.
7.
I have heard the learned counsel for the appellant and have perused the impugned judgments of the courts below as well as the other evidence on record.
Lower appellate Court has indeed taken a hypertechnical view of the whole matter.
Order of the Director dated 6101976 exhibit P-3/A is on the file of the trial Court.
Since, no objection was taken by the defendant either in the written statement or at the time when the same was exhibited in the trial Court, no prejudice would accrue in case the lower Appellate Court had heard the parties on the merits of the case or else amendment of the plaint ought to have been granted and the matter examined afresh.
8.
Amendment which is being sought is perfectly just on the facts and circumstances of the present case.
Mere negligence or mistake is no ground to decline the amendment of pleadings sought.
Apex Court in judgment reported as Jai Ram Manohar Lal v. National Building Material Supply, Gurgaon, AIR 1969 SC 1267 has observed as under :  "Rules of procedure are intended to be a handmaid to the administration of justice.
A party cannot be refused just relief merely because of some mistake, negligence, inadvertence of even infraction of the rules of procedure.
The Court always gives leave to amend the pleading of a party, unless it is satisfied that the party applying was acting mala fide, or that by his blunder, he had caused injury to his opponent which may not be compensated for by an order of costs.
However, negligent or careleness may have been the first omission, and, however late the proposed amendment, the amendment may be allowed if it can be made without injustice to the other side."
Following the above judgment, the apex Court again in the judgment reported as Messrs Ganesh Trading Co v. Moji Ram, AIR 1978 SC 484 has observed as under :-  "Procedural law is intended to facilitate and not to obstruct the course of substantive justice.
Provisions relating to pleadings in civil cases are meant to give to each side intimation of the case of the other so that it may be met, to enable Courts to determine what is really at issue between parties, and to prevent deviations from the course which litigation on particular causes of action must take."
9.
In this view of the matter, I accept the appeal as well as the application for amendment of the plaint and set aside the judgments and decrees of the courts below and send the case before the trial Court for fresh adjudication, who would decide the same after giving due opportunity to the parties to lead evidence; if any.
Parties are directed to appear before the trial Court on 30th March, 1992.
Since the matter pertains to service of the plaintiff, trial court is directed to decide the matter without much delay preferably within six months.
Appeal accepted.