AS Nehra, J - The plaintiff-appellant has filed this appeal against the judgment and decree dated 19.1.1983 passed by the Senior Sub Judge, Chandigarh, by which the appeal filed by the defendant-respondent-State was allowed, the judgment and decree passed by the trial Court on 1811980 was set aside and the suit filed by the plaintiff-appellant was dismissed,  2.
The suit of the plaintiff-appellant is that he was employed as Conductor in the Punjab Roadways and was a permanent civil servant that the General Manager, Punjab Roadways, Chandigarh, who is the appointing authority, dismissed the plaintiff from service, vide order dated 29.11.1977; that the said order was passed after holding an illegal and irregular departmental enquiry; that the plaintiff was issued a vague and indefinite charge-sheet which was not accompanied by any document to be relied upon during the enquiry, that the plaintiff submitted a reply to the charge-sheet and the enquiry was held against him; that the General Manager neither considered that reply nor was it conveyed to the Enquiry Officer; that the plaintiff was not supplied the documents on the basis of which the enquiry was held against him, that no statement of any witness was supplied to the plaintiff; that the Enquiry Officer did not give full opportunity to the plaintiff during the course of the enquiry for effective cross-examination; that the Enquiry Officer held the plaintiff guilty on charge Nos. 1 and 3 for misappropriate and, on other charges Nos. 2, 4 and 5, the Enquiry Officer held him guilty of negligence only; that the General Manager, without giving any opportunity to the plaintiff and without furnishing any reasons, issued the show-cause notice to the plaintiff for removal from service and ultimately, the General Manager, holding the plaintiff guilty of the charges in question dismissed the plaintiff for service; that the impugned order dated 29.11.1977 is based on no evidence and the material witnesses, namely, the passengers, who were allegedly travelling in the bus on different occasions were not examined during the enquiry; that even the General Manager, who was accompanying the inspection party on 27101974, was not examined as a witness; that, because the General Manager himself is a witness, so the impugned order which has been passed by him, is had and is liable to be set aside on this ground alone that the Inspector who checked the bus or 24.1.1975 regarding charge No. 5 was not examined during the enquiry on the ground that the plaintiff gave a statement that the enquiry was being delayed; that the Enquiry Officer did not record the statement of the plaintiff after the close of the prosecution evidence etc., as required under Rule 8(18) of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeals) rules, 1952 (hereinafter referred to as the Rule), which provision is mandatory in nature; that the violation of the said rule amounted to vitiation of the whole enquiry; that the findings of the Enquiry Officer as well as of the General Manager are based on extraneous considerations; that no opportunity was given to the plaintiff during the enquiry; that the Enquiry Officer and the General Manager did not apply their independent mind to the facts on the record; that the General Manager did not supply a copy of the findings of the Enquiry officer in spite of repeated requests; that the material documents i.e. way-bills etc., were not brought on the record at an any stage of the enquiry that neither the impugned order is a speaking order nor has the General Manager given detailed reasons for holding the plaintiff guilty of the charges and imposing the extreme penalty of dismissal and that the impugned order is therefore, illegal mala fide, and violative of Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India and also against the provisions of the Rules.
3.
The defendant-respondent-State contested the suit of the plaintiff- appellant, inter alia, on the ground that the Transport Department of the Punjab Government is an industry under the Industrial Disputes Act and, as such, only the Labour Court has the jurisdiction to try the case of the plaintiff; that the service of the plaintiff were terminated after a proper departmental enquiry and, as such, the suit is not maintainable; that a proper charge-sheet was issued and enquiry was conducted according to law; that the plaintiff was shown all the documents on the basis of which the enquiry was conducted; that the plaintiff gave his statement that he did not want to lead any defence in this case that a proper procedure was followed by the General Manager before removing the plaintiff from service that sufficient evidence was recorded by the Enquiry Officer before giving his findings that there is no illegality in not examining the General Manager as a witness, that the statement of the plaintiff was recorded by the Enquiry Officer after closing the other evidence, that the General Manager applied his mind before passing the final orders; that the order of termination of services of the plaintiff is legal; and that the civil Court at Chandigarh has no jurisdiction to try the case of the plaintiff.
4.
On the pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed by the trial Court :  1.
Whether this Court has jurisdiction to try the suit?
2.
Whether order dated 29.11.1977 passed by the General Manager, Punjab Roadways, Chandigarh, is illegal and void, as alleged in the plaint?
3.
Relief.
5.
The trial Court decided both the issues in favour of the plaintiff- appellant and the suit of the plaintiff-appellant was decreed.
Feeling aggrieved by the judgment and decree of the trial Court, the defendant- respondent filed an appeal which was allowed by the Senior Scale Judge, Chandigarh on 881980 and the judgment and decree of the trial Court was reversed on the ground that the civil Court had no jurisdiction to try the suit.
The judgment and decree passed by the Senior Sub Judge on 881980 was set aside by this Court and it was held that the civil Court has the jurisdiction to try the suit and the appeal all was remanded to the lower appellate Court for fresh decision on merits.
After remand, the Senior Sub-Judge held that the non-compliance of the provisions of rule 8(18) of the Rules does not make the impugned order illegal unless it is established from evidence on record that any prejudice has been caused to the plaintiff- appellant.
It was further held by the Senior Sub Judge that the plaintiff- appellant was asked to give a statement after the close of the enquiry but he did not give any statement and, therefore, no prejudice has been caused to the plaintiff-appellant in the enquiry.
The finding of the trial Court in paragraph 11 of its judgment to the effect that the punishing authority has violated the provisions of rule 9(4) of the Rules because the plain plaintiff- appellant was not furnished a copy of the report of enquiry held by the Enquiry Officer, was not set aside by the Senior Sub Judge.
6.
The learned counsel for the plaintiff-appellant has argued that the impugned order dated 29.11.1977 passed by the General Manager, Punjab Roadways, Chandigarh, dismissing the plaintiff-appellant from service is illegal because the provisions of the rule 9(4) of the Rules have not complied with by the punishing authority, because the plaintiff-appellant was not furnished a copy of the report of the Enquiry Officer alongwith the show- cause notice.
The plaintiff-appellant has specifically mentioned in paragraph 15 of the plaint that he was not supplied a copy of the report of the Enquiry Officer alongwith the show-cause notice.
The reply of the defendant- respondent is as under :  "That paragraph 15 is wrong and hence denied."
The plaintiff-appellant appeared as PW-1 and stated on oath that he was issued the show-cause notice but the enquiry report was not supplied to him alongwith the show-cause notice.
No evidence has been led by the defendant- respondent to the effect that the punishing authority furnished a copy of the report of the Enquiry Officer to the plaintiff-appellant alongwith the show cause notice.
Rule 9(4)(i) of the Rules is, as under :  9(4)(i) - If the punishing authority, having regard to its findings on all or any of the articles of charge, is of the opinion that any of the penalties specified in clauses (v) to (ix) of rule 5 should be imposed on the Government employee, it shall -  (a) furnish to the Government employee a copy of the report of the inquiry held by it and its findings on each article of charge or where the inquiry had been held by an inquiring authority, appointed by it, a copy of the report of such authority and a statement of its findings on each article of charge together with brief reasons for its disagreement, if any, with the findings of the inquiring authority : and (b) give the Government employee a notice stating the penalty proposed to be imposed on him and calling upon him to submit within fifteen days of receipt of the notice or such further time not exceeding fifteen days, as may be allowed, such representation as he may wish to make on the proposed penalty on the basis of the evidence adduced during the inquiry held under rule 8."
7.
The punishing authority has not supplied a copy of the report of the Enquiry Officer alongwith the show-cause notice served upon the plaintiff- appellant.
The plaintiff-appellant filed reply Exhibit P-7 to the show-cause notice and it was specifically mentioned therein that the plaintiff-appellant has not been supplied a copy of the report of the Enquiry Officer alongwith the show cause notice.
The punishing authority, while passing the impugned order on 29.11.1977, has not held that the plaintiff-appellant had been supplied a copy of the report of the Enquiry Officer alongwith the show-cause notice.
Therefore, in view of the above-mentioned discussion, I hold that the impugned order dated 29.11.1977 (Exhibit P-8) has been passed in contravention of rule 9(4) of the Rules and that the impugned order is illegal and against the Rules and, therefore, the same is liable to be quashed.
8.
In the result, this appeal is allowed, the judgment and decree passed by the Senior Sub Judge, Chandigarh, on 19.1.1983, is set aside and the judgment and decree passed by the trial Court on 1811980 is restored with no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.