Harjit Singh Bedi, J - The petitioner was appointed as Conductor and was working as such till November 8, 1974, when his services were terminated as a result of an enquiry held against him by the respondent-Corporation on the allegations that the petitioner had driven away without authorisation Bus No. 2585 which was parked at the Bus Stand Mehraj.
It was also stated that as a result of the aforesaid action of the petitioner, the respondent-Corporation also suffered some financial loss.
2.
On the services of the petitioner having been terminated, an Industrial Dispute was raised and referred to the Labour Court, Patiala, for adjudication, who vide its award Annexure P-3 dated 16th November, 1979, while holding the domestic enquiry to be good held that the order of termination of the services of the workman was not justified, and accordingly directly the reinstatement of the workman with continuity of service, but denied him the back wages.
Aggrieved against the denial of back wages, the petitioner has filed the present writ petition.
3.
Mr. Karminder Singh, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner-workman has urged, relying on a Full Bench decision of this Court in Hari Palace, Ambala City v. The Presiding Officer, Labour Court, 1979 P.L.R.
720 that the normal rule on reinstatement is full back wages and the party objecting to it must establish the circumstances necessitating departure.
He has further argued that as a case of theft registered against the petitioner on account of the same incidence had also ended in his acquittal, as noted by the Labour Court, the petitioner was entitled to the payment of full back wages.
The Supreme Court in Gujarat Steel Tubes Ltd etc. etc. v. Gujarat Steel Tubes Mazdoor Sabha and others, AIR 1980 SC 1896 has held that where the order of termination of service is held to be non est, the normal rule would be reinstatement with full back wages.
However, where the order itself is not held to be bad or the conduct of the workman not entirely blameless, the Court could deny the back wages to the workman keeping in view the facts and circumstances of the case.
However, I find that in the present case, the Labour Court has held the enquiry to be good, but has taken action under Section 11-A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter called the Act) in order to grant all reliefs to the workman other than payment of back wages.
In this situation, the question that arises is as to whether the action of the Labour Court in denying the back wages to the workman was within the jurisdiction or not.
In Baldev Singh v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court Patiala, AIR 1987 SC 104 the Supreme Court had this to say with respect to an award of the Labour Court whereby reinstatement without payment of back wages was ordered by taking recourse to Section 11-A of the Act.
"This order of the Tribunal, in our considered opinion, is quite in consonance with the provisions of Section 11-A of Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 which empowers the Tribunal to make an award, directing reinstatement of the workman on such terms and conditions, if any, as it thinks fit, or give such other relief to the workman including the award of any lesser punishment in lieu of discharge or dismissal as the circumstances of the case require."
In the instant case we have stated hereinbefore that the Tribunal clearly found that the enquiry was held fairly and properly and there was no violation of the principles of natural justice.
The Tribunal on considering the harshness of the punishment in consideration of the nature of the charge directed reinstatement of the workman with continuity of service but without back wages."
It was further held in the said judgment that the labour court had full jurisdiction to pass an order denying back wages while allowing the benefits of Section 11-A of the Act to the workman.
4.
For the reasons recorded above, there is no merit in the petition and the same is dismissed.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.