Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - Cement Corporation of India is aggrieved by the award of the Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Hisar.
By this award the Labour Court has held that the respondent-workman is entitled to be placed in Grade-IV in the cadre of Tester-cum-Gauger with effect from January 1, 1982 and in Grade V with effect from January 1, 1986.
A few facts may be noticed :  The respondent-workman was appointed as a Tester in the Dalmia Dadri Cement Limited on November 20, 1975.
This unit was closed on March 19, 1983 and was taken over by the Central Government and vested in the Central Corporation of India, viz, the petitioner.
Thereafter, the petitioner gave fresh appointment to respondent No. 2 as Assistant Tester-cum-Gauger in Grade-II with effect from October 1, 1981.
He was upgraded as Tester-cum-Gauger in Grade-III w.e.f.
September 1, 1982.
The respondent-workman was placed in Grade-IV with effect from January 1, 1984.
Claiming that he was entitled to be placed in Grade-IV with effect from January 1, 1982 and in Grade V with effect from September 1, 1982, respondent No. 2 approached the Labour Court in a petition under Section 33-C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as `the Act').
In support of his submission the respondent-workman relied on the Cement Arbitration Award of 1978 by which the demand of the federation of the employees for proper nomenclature and classification into appropriate grades had been upheld by the Board of Arbitrators appointed by the Government of India under Section 10-A of the Act.
A copy of the relevant extract of the award has been produced on the record of this case by the respondent as Annexure R/2/5 with his written statement.
According this award, a Tester or Gauger was entitled to be placed in Grade-III and promoted to Grade-IV on the basis of length of service, efficiency and quality of work etc.
Following this award, the Labour Court found that the full fledged Tester in the year 1981 could not be placed in Grade-II by the respondent management at the time of recruitment because according to the award of 1978, item No. 11 at page 2922 of the Award Gazette, the minimum grade to which the workman was entitled as Tester was Grade-III.
His placement in Grade-II was against the letter and spirit of the document Ex. MW 2/2....." Annexure R/2/5 is stated to be an extract of Ex. M.W.
2/2.
Finding that the respondent-workman was entitled to be placed in Grade-III with effect from the year 1978, the Labour Court upheld the claim of the respondent for the grant of Grade-IV with effect from January 1, 1982.
Further it found that in view of the award of the Board of Arbitrators for Cement and Industry, 1983, the promotion to Grade-V will depend on length of service, efficiency, quality of work etc.
It fixed up a period of four years as minimum condition of eligibility for Grade-V Having found that the respondent-workman was entitled to be placed in Grade-IV with effect from January 1, 1982, the Labour Court held him entitled to the grant of Grade-V with effect from January 1, 1986.
2.
Aggrieved by this award of the Labour Court, the petitioner-Corporation has approached this Court, through the present petition.
It has been inter alia averred that the application under Section 33-C(2) filed by the workman was totally misconceived.
It has been further averred that the workman has not actually performed "all the duties and responsibilities of the post of Tester-cum-Gauger Grade IV and Grade V ever since he was appointed in CCI w.e.f.
1101981 ...." It is maintained that the respondent-workman had been appointed only as Assistant-Tester-cum-Gauger with effect from October 1, 1981 and that he was not even eligible for appointment to the post of Tester-cum-Gauger in Grade-III as he did not possess the prescribed qualification 10 + 2 with Science Group with two years of experience or Matric (Science) with eight years of experience.
On his premises, the award of the Labour Court has been impugned.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondent No. 2 it has been inter alia pointed out that the petitioner-management had raised a preliminary objection with regard to the maintainability of the application under Section 33-C(2) of the Act.
This preliminary objection had been decided by the Labour Court vide orders dated September 8, 1986.
The order of the Labour Court has not been impugned either in this petition or through any other petition.
A copy of the order dated September 8, 1986 has been produced as annexure R/2/1 with the written statement.
It has been further pointed out that the claim of the workman was based upon the rates determined by the Cement Arbitration Awards of 1978 and 1983.
The application under Section 33-C(2) of the Act had been filed only to ensure the implementation of the said awards.
Further details with read to various persons possessing qualifications similar to those of the respondent-workman have also been furnished to show that they had been granted Grade IV and even Grade VI by the petitioner.
On these premises the claim as made in the petition has been controverted.
4.
I have heard Mr. HN Mehtani, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. RS Mittal for the respondent-workman.
Mr. Mehtani has raised a two-fold contention.
It has been firstly contended that the workman was working as a Tester in Grade II in Dalmia Dadri Cement Ltd, at the time of this closure.
Accordingly the petitioner-Company had rightly placed him in Grade-II at the time of his appointment on October 1, 1981.
It has been further contended that the application under Section 33(C)(2) was wholly incompetent and the Labour Court had no jurisdiction to order the promotion of the workman to Grades IV and V with effect from January 1, 1982 and January 1, 1986 respectively.
On the other hand the learned counsel for the respondent points out that according to the Cement Arbitration Award of 1978 the workman was entitled to be placed in Grade III w.e.f.1978 and as such his absorption in Grade II with effect from October 1, 1981 was wholly illegal.
It has been further pointed out that the requisite relief regarding placement in Grade III, Grade IV and Grade V having already been determined by the awards of 1978 and 1983, the workman was entitled to move the petition under Section 33(C)(2).
It has been further contended that the petitioner having not challenged the order dated September 8, 1986 passed by the Labour Court with regard to the maintainability of the application under Section 33-C(2) of the Act, the petitioner cannot be permitted to raise the contention in this petition.
5.
I have perused the record.
A perusal of the award of 1978 shows that a Tester/Gauger was entitled to be placed in Grade III.
Furthermore, a perusal of the award of 1983 (Annexure R/2/26 with the written statement) shows that the Tester/Gauger was entitled to be placed in Grade-IV or Grade-V Promotion to Grade V was to depend on length of service, efficiency and quality of work etc.
This award of 1978 having been given by the competent authority was binding on Dalmia Dadri Cement Ltd Accordingly, the respondent-workman had to be placed in Grade-III in 1978.
The petitioner cannot take advantage to the effect that this award had not been implemented by Dalmia Dadri Cement Ltd Furthermore, under the award of 1983, a Tester or Gauger was entitled to promotion to Grade V on the basis of length of service etc.
When these awards are read harmoniously and applied to the case of the respondent-workman it becomes clear that he was entitled to be placed in Grade-III in the year 1978 and had to be promoted to Grade-IV on the basis of work etc. On these basis the learned Labour Court has found that the workman is entitled to be placed in Grade IV with effect from January 1, 1982.
Applying the same principle for promotion to Grade V the workman has been held entitled to promotion with effect from January 1, 1986.
In other words, the learned Labour Court has only implemented the awards of 1978 and 1983.
The order is apparently fair and just.
It calls for no interference in the exercise of extra-ordinary jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution.
6.
In this view of the matter it appears difficult to accept the contention that the application under Section 33-C(2) was not maintainable.
There is another aspect of the matter also.
The preliminary objection raised by the petitioner-Corporation was rejected by the Labour Court by its order of September 8, 1986.
This order has not been challenged in this petition.
Even a reference thereto has not been made.
Not only that the order was passed almost five years back, but even otherwise I find no ground to hold that the application under Section 33-C(2) was not competent.
After all, the respondent-workman was seeking the implementation of the Cement Arbitration Awards of 1978 and 1983.
He had no other effective remedy except by way of application which he had actually moved.
7.
Mr. Mehtani has then contended that the respondent-workman was not actually performing the duties of a Tester-cum-Gauger and consequently he was not entitled to be placed in Grade IV or Grade V He has also referred to the qualifications to show that the workman was not eligible.
From a perusal of the award, I find that no contention was raised before the learned Labour Court to point out that the workman was not actually performing the duties of a Tester or a Tester-cum-Gauger.
The petitioner cannot be permitted to raise this contention for the first time.
As far as the contention that the workman was not qualified for appointment to the post of Tester-cum-Gauger, it is pertinent to mention that the petitioner had itself promoted the respondent-workman to Grade III with effect from September 1, 1982 and to Grade IV with effect from January 1, 1984.
When the petitioner itself had promoted the respondent-workman to these grades, it cannot be permitted to contend that he was not qualified for the post.
Further, the Labour Court has pointed that a number of other persons possessing the same or similar qualifications as possessed by the petitioner had been appointed and placed in Grade IV etc. by the Corporation.
A reference to the written statement filed by respondent No. 2 shows that there are a number of persons, who are mere matriculates without Science and they are promoted from Grade III to Grade IV in a period of less than two years and from Grade IV to Grade VI after they had rendered service for less than one year.
By way of illustration, it may be mentioned that one Mr. IS Yadav was recruited as a Tester-cum-Gauger in Grade III on October 3, 1981.
He was promoted to Grade IV on February 1, 1983.
He was further promoted to Grade VI on January 1, 1984.
A number of other instances to the same effect have also been given by the respondent.
In this situation, I find no jurisdiction for upholding the objection raised on behalf of the petitioner.
8.
Mr. Mehtani contends that the Labour Court has erred in fixing the period of four years.
He submits that it is totally arbitrary.
However, a reference to the record of the case shows that the petitioner itself has been promoting people from one grade to the next higher grade and more particularly from Grade IV to Grade VI within a period of less than one year even though the person concerned was not qualified for appointment even to Grade III according to the petitioner.
The Labour Court, in my view, has taken a totally reasonable view in fixing the period of four years.
In any case, when the petitioner itself has been granting promotion within a period of less than one year it can have no legitimate objection to the period of four years.
Mr. Mehtani has then relied upon the judgment of the apex Court in PK Singh and others v. Presiding Officer and others, AIR 1988 SC 1618.
This case is clearly distinguishable on facts.
No award like the one in the present case had preceded the proceedings under Section 33-C(2) of the Act.
Accordingly, the decision of their Lordships has no application on the facts of the case.
9.
In view of the above, I find no merit in this petition, which is dismissed.
The respondent-workman shall be entitled to his costs, which are assessed at Rs. 3,000/-.
Petition dismissed.