Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - Municipal Committee, Rewari, the petitioner herein, is aggrieved by the award dated April 26, 1988 passed by the Labour Court.
By this order the Labour Court had accepted the claim of respondent No. 2, a former employee of the Municipal Committee for the encashment of earned leave for a period of eight months and as a result the petitioner-Committee was directed to pay Rs. 11,200/- to respondent No. 2.
The award has been challenged on two grounds.
It has been averred that respondent No. 2 had been retired under Rule 17 of the Haryana Municipal Services Rules, 1982 (hereinafter referred to as `the Rules') on attaining the age of 55 years.
It was an order of premature retirement.
Relying on the instructions of the Government issued vide letter dated February 13, 1978 (Annexure P2 with the writ petition), it has been averred that the respondent was not entitled to the benefit of encashment of leave.
It has also been pointed out that specific reliance had been placed on these instructions before the learned Labour Court and without adverting thereto the impugned order has been passed.
2.
Respondent No. 2 has filed the written statement.
It has been inter alia averred that the instructions at Annexure P2 had been rescinded by the State Government itself vide letter dated March 9, 1988.
The various grounds of challenge to the legality of the order of the learned Labour Court have also been controverted.
3.
Mr. Ajay Lamba, learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that a person who has been retired before attaining the age of superannuation cannot be treated at par with the employee who retires on attaining the age of superannuation.
He retires on completion of the tenure of services on attaining the age of 58 years.
Consequently, he submits that the Government has validly provided by issuing instructions that the benefit of encashment of leave shall not be admissible in the case of "premature/voluntary retirement of persons who are compulsorily retired as a measure of punishment".
He further submits that in view of these instructions the order passed by the Labour Court was wholly illegal and cannot be sustained.
On the other hand, Mr. Amar Vivek, learned counsel for the respondent No. 2 has contended that the classification introduced by the instructions dated February 13, 1978 is wholly violative of Article 14 of the Constitution All persons, who have retired from service either on attaining the age of 58 years or earlier thereto are entitled to the benefit of encashment of earned leave in accordance with the provisions of the Punjab Civil Service Rules, Vol.
I, Part-I, as applicable in Haryana.
He further submits that the order passed by the learned Labour Court was absolutely just and fair and should be sustained.
Mr. Ajay Lamba has also raised the objection that the validity of the instructions of February 13, 1978 having not been specifically challenged by respondent No. 2 he cannot be permitted to do so now while defending the petition.
4.
The provision for encashment of leave is contained in Rule 821 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume I, Part-I.
It contemplates that leave at the credit of a Government servant normally lapse on the date of his retirement, but persons who retire on superannuation or after the 30th day of September, 1977 shall be entitled to encashment in lieu of the unutilised leave due as leave preparatory to retirement.
The rule, in my view, confers a right on every employee who retires to encash the unutilised leave after his retirement.
This rule does not create any classification between those who retire on attaining the age of 58 years and those who have retired or get retirement at any stage prior thereto.
A person may continue in service till he attains the age of 58 years.
An other person may seek premature retirement on account of his family compulsions.
Under the rules, even the employer has the powers to retire a person on completion of 25 years of service or 50 years of age.
All these persons, in my view, constitute one class and are entitled to the encashment of leave.
It is by instructions issued by the Government that a provision had been made for denying this benefit to such persons as are retired before attaining the age of 58 years or compulsorily retired by way of punishment.
In my view, there is no valid basis for denying the benefit of encashment of leave to a person, who has been prematurely retired before attaining the age of 58 years.
Premature retirement does not involve a penalty.
In casts no stigma.
It is only ordered in accordance with the provisions of the rules, which provide for such a retirement.
To deny the person leave or encashment thereof would be wholly irrational and result in an invidious discrimination between the employees.
5.
Mr. Amar Vivek has brought to my notice two Single Bench judgments of this Court in Amar Singh v. Chief Secretary to Govt. Punjab and others, 1986(1) SLR 686 and OP Vijh v. The State of Haryana and others, 1988(1) SLR 741.
These judgment clearly took the view that the instructions denying the benefit of encashment of leave are discriminatory and thus violative of Article 14 of the Constitution Respectfully following these judgments, I hold that the instructions were violative of Article 14 of the Constitution Presumably, it was in view of these decisions that the Government itself had issued instructions on March 9, 1988 providing inter alia that with effect from the date of the issue of the letter even those who are compulsorily retired shall be entitled to encashment of leave.
6.
In view of the above, the order of the Labour Court in ordering the payment of Rs. 11,200/- to respondent No. 2 cannot be successfully assailed.
It is accordingly upheld.
7.
It is no doubt correct that respondent No. 2 has not challenged the validity of the instructions issued by the Government vide its letter of February 13, 1978.
It is also correct that the burden of pleading all necessary fact lies on the person who challenges validity of a rule, statute or instructions.
However, in view of the fact that this Court had as early as March 10, 1986 held that provision for denying the benefit of encashment of leave to those who were compulsorily or prematurely retired is violative of Article 14 of the Constitution and had specifically quashed the part of the instructions issued by the State of Punjab vide its letter dated January 25, 1978 I take the respondent-workman was justified in ignoring these instructions and not raising a specific plea in the behalf.
Once the instructions had been declared invalid by the Court, the Labour Court was fully justified in not adverting thereto while passing the impugned order.
8.
Accordingly, I find no merit in this petition.
It is consequently dismissed.
The petitioner having been granted an interim stay on January 17, 1989 has not made any payment to respondent No. 2.
It is directed to do the needful within one month from the date of the receipt of a copy of this order.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.