Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - Two vehicles registration No. PBS 5171 and PBS 971 were transferred by Paul Bus Service (Regd.)
Sangrur to Mahavir Transport Company (Regd.
), Sangrur.
As a result, the petitioner, who was working as a conductor on one of these two buses was also transferred on October 31, 1984.
On December 4, 1984, the services of the petitioner were terminated.
Aggrieved by the action, the petitioner approached the Labour Court who vide its award of January 28, 1988 had declined the claim.
Hence this petition.
2.
On consideration of the evidence, the Labour Court has recorded a finding of fact that the relationship of master and servant between the petitioner and Paul Bus Service is not proved.
Further, it has been found by the Labour Court that the petitioner has not asserted that he was employed with Mahavir Transport Company.
Accordingly, the prayer for reinstatement as also back wages has been rejected by the learned Labour Court.
3.
Mrs. Sabina, learned counsel for the petitioner has raised a two-fold contention.
She submits that the actual transfer of permit was performed by the State Transport Commissioner on January 10, 1986.
The petitioner is to be deemed to have continued in the service of Paul Bus Service till the actual transfer was effected.
In the alternative, she submits that on the transfer of the bus the petitioner was to be deemed to be an employee of respondent No. 2 and the validity of the action in terminating his services deserved to be gone into by the Labour Court.
4.
Mr. Pawan Mutneja, learned counsel for the respondents, on the other hand submits that factually the vehicles had been transferred on October 31, 1984.
Along with the vehicles, the employees viz. driver, conductor, etc. had also been transferred.
The relationship between the petitioner and the Paul Bus Service (respondent No. 1) has ceased to exist with effect from that date.
It is in view of this position that the learned Labour Court has found that the relationship of master and servant did not exist between the petitioner and respondent No. 1.
He has also relied on a letter dated January 12, 1985 written by the petitioner along with certain other persons to the Labour Inspector and others.
A copy of this letter has been produced along with the written statement as Annexure R-1.
5.
This letter was written much prior to the date on which the petitioner raised a demand against the management.
In this letter, it has been, inter-alia, stated as under :-  "About three months ago, Shri Ranjit Singh Grewal, Proprietor of M/s Pal Bus Service, Sangrur has sold his two buses PBS 5171 and PBS 971 along with their route permits (Sangrur to Bareta) to Shri Jagdish Chand and Jagan Nath.
That, we had been working on these two buses on permanent basis when Shri Ranjit Singh Grewal, Prop.
of the Pal Bus Service, sold these two buses to the new Proprietors.
There was negotiation and clear understanding between the proprietors that as the applicants were permanently employed on these two buses so they are not to be removed from service by the new Proprietors of these buses.
Earlier their daily attendance was marked by M/s Pal Bus Service Company and their G.P.F.
was also deducted by the Company.
We were also getting leave facility, uniforms.
Now we are working with the new Proprietors of the said buses, but we have not been paid our salary so far, nor, our attendance has been marked by them.
Now Shri Kartar Singh Driver has been removed from service.
He has also not been paid his salary.
Surinder Singh Driver had been hospitalised for three months due to illness.
Now, when he has brought his medical fitness certificate to join duty and asked for his salary etc. the new proprietors refused to pay him and have also threatened him with dismissal from service and he has also not been reimbursed for his medical bill.
Both these proprietors have changed the name of M/s Pal Bus Service (Regd) Sangrur to M/s Mahavir Bus Service (Regd) Sangrur which has not yet been officially approved.
Now they are trying to remove us from service although we have been working on these two buses permanently.
We, therefore, humbly pray that our last three months salary be got paid to us.
Our daily attendance be marked by our new Employers.
Our General Provident Fund and other facilities that were provided to us earlier, be got restored to the applicants."
It is clearly mentioned by the petitioner that the buses had been sold to Mahavir Transport Company.
It has also been admitted that the petitioner had been transferred to Mahavir Transport Company.
In this situation, it is apparent that no relationship of master and servant subsisted between the petitioner and the respondent No. 1.
The finding of the Labour Court, in this behalf, is upheld.
However, in view of the transfer of vehicles along with employees the petitioner should have become an employee of M/s Mahavir Transport Company.
The petitioner who was probably a semi-literate person, did not appreciate the correct factual position.
I think, it will be in the interest of justice, if the finding of the Labour Court on issue No. 2 only is set aside and the matter is remanded to it for fresh decision after the parties have been given an opportunity to lead evidence in that behalf.
This is all the more so in view of the fact that respondent No. 2 has not appeared in this Court to controvert the statement of facts made in the writ petition.
6.
The award of the Labour Court (Annexure P-8) is upheld in respect of the finding on issue No. 1.
The claim of the petitioner against respondent No. 1 is declined.
However, the matter is remanded to the Labour Court for determination of the petitioner's claim against respondent No. 2.
The writ petition is accordingly disposed of.
In the circumstances of the case and specially the fact that no body has appeared on behalf of respondent No. 2 to contest this petition, I pass no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.