Jawahar Lal Gupta.
J (Oral) - The petitioner who was enrolled as a Sepoy on August 23, 1971 was discharged from the Army on August 31, 1986.
His claim for pension having been declined vide orders dated August 6, 1987 he has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
While serving the Indian Army, the petitioner was accused of having deserted at 2100 hours on June 10, 1984 and on June 11, 1984 at 0255 hours he was taken into custody.
He remained in custody till July, 1985 when he was tried by a Summary Court Martial.
After trial, he was sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of seven months.
38 days before the date of completion of the term of imprisonment, the petitioner was deputed for duty at Saichen.
He served till August 31, 1986 when he was discharged on account of his having been adjudged as low medical category 'B'.
His claim for pension was declined vide orders dated August 6, 1987 in the following words :  "1.
Refer to your petition dated 06 July, 87.
2.
You were enrolled in the Army on 28th August, 71 and released from service on 01 September, 86.
As you were tried by SCM under AA Section 38(1) and awarded 7 months RI, the period spent under RI will he treated on recordable service towards pensionary benefits.
Thus you have rendered less than 15 years qualifying service and therefore no service pension is admissible to you as minimum qualifying service laid down for grant of service pension is 15 years.
Sd/-  Capt.
Record Officer, For Commanding Officer."
This action of the respondents has been challenged on various grounds raised in the writ petition as also the rejoinder to the written statement filed by the petitioner.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, the factual position has not been disputed.
However, the claim of the petitioner has been controverted on different grounds.
3.
I have heard Mr. SS Johal, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. HS Giani for the respondents.
On behalf of the petitioner it has been contended that the conviction of the petitioner by the Summary Court Martial on July 13, 1985 was vitiated as it was in violation of the provisions of Section 38 (specifically note 8 of section 38) and as the provisions of rule 180 of the Army Rules, 1954 had not been complied with.
It has also been contended that according to the letter dated May 1, 1986 "the period of 177 days qualifying service had been condoned and as such it could not be said that the petitioner had not served for 15 years so as to qualify for the grant of pension.
Mr. Giani learned counsel for the respondents and Maj. VC Chitravanshi appearing for the respondents have controverted the claim made on behalf of the petitioner.
4.
A perusal of the record shows that the petitioner had joined service on August 23, 1971.
He was discharged from service on August 31, 1986.
In the discharge certificate a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-4, it has been inter alia mentioned that the petitioner had been discharged "in consequence of tfr to pen est on fulfilling the conditions of enrolment."
I have read these words with the help of Maj. Chitravanshi and according to him it means that the petitioner had been discharged in consequence of "transfer to pension establishment on fulfilling the conditions of enrolment."
Apparently the petitioner had completed 15 years and 8 days of service.
In the normal course of events, he should have got his pension.
It has, however, been denied to him on account of the fact that he had remained in custody to undergo 7 months' Rigorous Imprisonment in military prison.
I am informed that the petitioner had factually undergone sentence of 5 months and 22 days and that 38 days before the completion of the term of his imprisonment he was actually deputed for duty to Saichen.
It thus appears that the petitioner had undergone imprisonment for approximately 172 days.
It is on account of this period of imprisonment that the authorities have taken the view that the petitioner had not completed 15 years of qualifying service so as to be entitled to get pension.
In this situation Mr. Johal has been driven to contend that the trial and consequently the conviction of the petitioner was wholly illegal and as such it cannot be said that the petitioner did not complete 15 years qualifying service.
Let us examine his contentions.
5.
Relying on the convening order (Anx.
R-4) and the provisions of Sec. 38 of the Act, Mr. Johal contends that two or more persons cannot be tried jointly for the offence of desertion.
According to the learned counsel five persons named in the convening order having been tried jointly by the Summary Court Martial, the provisions of note 8 below section 38 of the Act have been violated and as such the whole trial is vitiated.
The relevant portion of the convening order reads as under -  "Convening Order  1.
A SCM composed as under will assemble in HQ 166 Mountain Regiment at 0900 on 13 July, 85 to try the following personnel of 166 Mtn Regt who are charged with offence under AA Sec. 38(1), is DESERTING THE SERVICE from Hashimara on 11 June, 84 at about 2100 hrs from unit camp location, until apprehended by the Military Police at New Jalpaiguri Railway Station at about 0255 hrs.
on 11 June.
84 :  a) 125639 - W L/NK(OPR), Ajaib Singh at 0900h b) 14461032-N Gnr(GD) Harjinder Singh at 1000h c) 14462217-H (GD) Partap Singh at 1000h d) 1445166-Y Gnr(DMT) Sahib Singh at 1200h e) 14328659-N L/NK Kirmel Singh at 1300h A perusal of the above order shows that the Court had been convened to try L/NK.
Ajaib Singh at 0900 hours and the various other persons thereafter at interval of one hour each.
On a perusal of the document I am satisfied that there was not a joint trial of five persons.
This being the position in my view the provisions of note 8 to section 38 have not been violated in any manner whatsoever.
I am not persuaded to hold that the order directed joint trial of five persons.
Accordingly the first submission made by Mr. Johal is rejected.
6.
The learned counsel then contends that the trial is vitiated as the provisions of rule 180 were not complied with.
According to the learned counsel the petitioner had a right to be associated with the Court of Inquiry which preceded trial by the Summary Court Martial.
The learned counsel contends that according to rule 180, every person has a right to be present throughout the Court of Inquiry and lead the evidence.
Mr. Johal submits that the petitioner was not permitted to participate in the Court of Inquiry and as a result, the entire trial is vitiated.
It is appropriate to notice the provisions of rule 180.
It provides as under :-  "180.
Procedure when character of a person subject to the Act is involved.
Save in the case of a prisoner of war who is still absent whenever any inquiry affects the character or military reputation of a persons subject to the Act full opportunity must be afforded to such person of being present throughout the inquiry and of making any statement and of giving any evidence he may wish to make or give, and of cross-examining any witness whose evidence, in his opinion, affects his character or military reputation and producing any witnesses in defence of his character or military reputation.
The presiding officer of the court shall take such steps as may be necessary to ensure that any such person so affected and not previously notified receives notice of and fully understands his rights, under this rule."
A perusal of the above rule shows that whenever any inquiry affects the character or military reputation of a person subject to the provisions of the Army Act, full opportunity has to be afforded to such a person of being present and participating in the inquiry.
In my view, a court of inquiry is held for the purpose of determining as to whether or not a regular trial is necessary.
If no evidence is found against the person during the court of inquiry, it may not be necessary to hold any further proceedings in the nature of summary of evidence or trial by a court martial.
It is in view of this purpose that the rule enjoins upon the authorities to associate the person concerned with the proceedings and to afford him a full opportunity to participate in the inquiry.
The rule, in my view embodies an elementary principle of natural justice and is calculated to afford a due and reasonable opportunity to the person whose character or military reputation is at stake.
On a perusal of the language of the rule, I have no doubt that it embodies the principle of fair trial and has to be complied with by the authority conducting the inquiry.
7.
The grievance of the petitioner as made out in the petition is that this rule was not complied with in spite of the fact that the character and military reputation of the petitioner were involved.
It has been specifically averred that no evidence was recorded in his presence and he was not called upon to make any statement or produce his defence.
In reply to these averments which have been made in paragraph 7 of the writ petition it has been stated on behalf of the respondents that "a consolidated Court of Inquiry in respect of the individual alongwith other similar personnel who deserted from service was held.
There is no requirement of applying provisions of Army Rule 180 in the case of desertion.
Since the petitioner did not ask for a copy of Court of Inquiry hence it was not given to him ........."  8.
It thus appears that the petitioner was not associated with the Court of Inquiry as according to the respondent, rule 180 is not attracted in the case of persons accused of desertion.
I am unable to sustain this view.
Desertion depicts a totally complete unpatriotic attitude.
It reflects adversely on the character and military reputation of a soldier.
In my view, the charge of desertion does reflect on the character and military reputation of a person and accordingly, the view taken by the authorities cannot be sustained.
The provisions of rule 180 were clearly attracted.
9.
It has been contended on behalf of the respondents that failure to comply with the provisions of rule 180 cannot be said to have prejudiced the interests of the petitioner.
I am unable to sustain this plea.
If the petitioner had been associated during the Court of Inquiry, he would have not only known the evidence that existed against him but would have also had the chance to cross-examine the witnesses.
Further it would have been open to him to confront the witnesses with the evidence recorded during the Court of inquiry.
Maj. Chiravanshi asserts that the evidence recorded during the Court of Inquiry is not admissible under the provisions of rule 182.
This provides as under :-  "182.
Proceedings of court of inquiry not admissible in evidence- The proceedings of a Court of Inquiry or any confession statement, or answer to a question made or given at a court of inquiry, shall not be admissible in evidence against a person subject to the Act, nor shall any evidence respective the proceedings of the court be given against any such person except upon the trial of such person for wilfully giving false evidence before that court."
A perusal of the above rule shows that the evidence recorded during the course of inquiry is not admissible against the accused person.
The rule, however, does not provide that it cannot be used to confront and contradict the testimony of the witnesses who appeared during the trial.
In view of the above, I am of the opinion that a valuable opportunity guaranteed by rule 180 was denied to the petitioner,  10.
Even otherwise, at the time of discharge from the Army, the petitioner was informed vide letter dated May 1, 1986 that "the period of 177 days non-qualifying service is being condoned by this office ............".
Even in the discharge certificate it was specifically mentioned that the petitioner was being transferred to pension establishment.
In the written statement filed in this Court, it has been inter alia stated that "the case for grant of service pension can only be considered on receipt of sanction of the competent authority for restoration of forfeited service and condonation of deficiency in service, which is being processed."
It has also been stated that "the case of the individual for obtaining Govt. orders for restoration of forfeited service and condonation in deficiency in service has already been taken up with Army HQ Necessary action will be taken accordingly on receipt of Govt.
orders."
In spite of the fact that the petitioner had been discharged from service on August 31, 1986 and more than 5 years have elapsed still nothing appears to have been done.
11.
Taking the totality of the circumstances into consideration I am of the opinion that it was eminently a case where the authorities should have passed appropriate orders expeditiously.
Since they failed to do so in spite of the fact that the petitioner had waited for almost two years before approaching this Court, I am constrained to hold that the petitioner's trial is vitiated on account of the non-compliance with the provisions of rule 180 and that the period of imprisonment cannot now be treated as not qualifying for pension.
12.
Accordingly, it is held that the petitioner had completed 15 years of qualifying service and is entitled to the grant of pension.
The appropriate amount of pension along with arrears shall be released to the petitioner within three months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
In the circumstances of the case, I leave the parties to bear their own costs.
Order accordingly.