Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, an Executive Engineer with the Haryana Urban Development Authority (hereinafter referred to as the HUDA) is aggrieved by the order dated August 27, 1990 by which Mr. JS Chaudhary respondent No. 3 was given the current duty charge of the post of Superintending Engineer as an ad hoc arrangement.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as a Sub-Divisional Engineer with the HUDA on June 1, 1977.
He was promoted as an Executive Engineer on September 13, 1985.
As against this, respondent No. 3 was appointed as a Sub-Divisional Engineer on May 16, 1977.
He was, according to the petitioner, appointed as an Executive Engineer on April 29, 1986.
It is further averred that the service conditions of the parties are governed by the draft regulations of the rules which have been prepared by the HUDA in exercise of powers conferred by Section 34 of the Haryana Urban Development Authority Act, 1970 (hereinafter referred to as the Act).
It is claimed by the petitioner that these rules have been meticulously followed although the same have not been approved adopted for ...., as for all intents and purposes, they are binding in nature."
Relying on the provisions of these rules, it has been averred that "an officer who is having the qualification of B.Sc.
Engineering (Civil or equivalent) with 7 years' experience as Executive Engineer" is to be appointed to the post of Superintending Engineer.
It has been further averred that the post of Superintending Engineer fell vacant in the year 1990.
No officer including the petitioner and respondent No. 3 was eligible to be promoted on regular basis to the post of Superintending Engineer.
Apprehending that respondent No. 3 who is having links with various ministers and may usurp the post of Superintending Engineer", the petitioner filed a civil suit in the court of Sub Judge I Class, Ambala City, on August 22, 1990, praying for permanent injunction restraining the defendants from promoting Mr. JS Chaudhary, respondent No. 3.
On August 23, 1990 the Civil Court directed the petition's notice to the defendants and fixed the case for August 30, 1990.
While the matter was pending before the Civil Court, the HUDA issued an order dated August 27, 1990 by which the current duty charge of the vacant post of Superintending Engineer was given to respondent No. 3.
On December 13, 1990, the stay application filed by the petitioner is alleged to have been disposed of on the ground that the relief claimed had become infructuous.
Aggrieved by this order of the learned trial Court, the petitioner approached the Appellate Court i.e. Additional District Judge, Ambala City on December 21, 1990.
The learned Appellate Court issued directions to the trial Court "to rehear the stay application of the petition...... On March 12, 1991 the matter came up before the Court.
The petitioner withdrew the suit with permission to file a new one.
A copy of the order passed by the Court on March 12, 1991 has been produced as Annexure P-5 with the writ petition.
It is averred that during the pendency of the suit, the petitioner had filed applications before respondent No. 2 for the consideration of his claim.
Having failed to get any relief, he has approached this Court through the present petition to challenge the order August 27, 1990 on various grounds.
3.
A prayer has also been made against the order dated September 10, 1990 by which it was directed "Shri SC Malik, Executive Engineer, HUDA Division II, Panchkula will look after the work of HUDA Divn.
I, Panchkula in addition to his present duties.
4.
This will relieve Sh. SS Chaudhary, XEN temporarily of the charge of Divn.
I, Panchkula till he holds the current duty charge of Superintending Engineer (HQ), Panchkula."
5.
Separate written statements have been filed on behalf of the official and private respondents.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2, besides raising a preliminary objection regarding the maintainability of the writ petition after the petitioner had chosen the forum of civil court, it has been inter alia urged that the petitioner had been conveyed adverse remarks for certain period and that he was even censured vide orders dated April 28, 1989.
It has been further averred that the total experience of respondent No. 3 as an Executive Engineer is more than that of the petitioner and "that is why respondent was given current duty charge for the post of Superintending Engineer."
It has been further pointed out that there was some controversy on the point - "whether the experience gained by an official ..... higher post is countable towards .... vacancy ......".
On a reference, the Legal Remem brancer opined that it could not be counted while the Advocate General, Haryana was of the opinion that it could be counted.
After obtaining the advice, the respondents aver that current duty charge was given to respondent No. 3 as a stopgap arrangement.
It is suggested that the petition is premature and the appointment on regular basis is yet to be made against this post.
It has also been averred that "the case of the petitioner was considered along with that of respondent No. 3 while giving him current duty charge of the post of Superintending Engineer."
On this premises, the claim of the petitioner has been controverted.
6.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondent No. 3, besides reiterating the position taken in the written statement of respondent Nos. 1 and 2, certain additional pleas regarding the current duty charge of the post of Executive Engineer having been given to respondent No. 3 in July, 1980 and May, 1985 have also been made.
It has been averred that the claim of the petitioner and respondent No. 3 was considered for promotion to the post of Executive Engineer in the year 1980, the petitioner, it is suggested, was not found suitable and as a result, the current duty charge of Executive Engineer was given to respondent No. 3 and he held this post upto January 2, 1981.
It has been further averred that the post of Executive Engineer had become available in May, 1985.
Even on this occasion, respondent No. 3 was found suitable and actually given the current duty charge of the post with effect from May 3, 1985.
On this premises, it is averred that respondent No. 3 has longer experience as Executive Engineer and was even senior to the petitioner.
7.
Mr. Nijjar appearing for the petitioner has raised a two-fold contention.
He submits that the petitioner was senior to respondent No. 3 in the cadre of Executive Engineers and had a right to be considered for promotion prior to him.
He submits that the action of the respondents in giving the current duty charge to respondent No. 3 without considering the claim of the petitioner is wholly arbitrary and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
With reference to the draft rules, he contends that the period of ad hoc service could not be counted for experience or determination of seniority.
On the other hand, Mr. JS Khehar and Mr. Ashutosh Mohunta appearing for the respondents have contended that the action of the respondents does not violate Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
It is pointed out that the claim of the petitioner was duly considered before the impugned orders were issued and it was only thereafter that the appropriate orders were passed by the authorities.
It has further been contended that the period of service rendered by the respondent No. 3 while holding the current duty charge of the post has been rightly counted as his experience by the appropriate authority.
8.
Since there was controversy between the parties regarding the consideration of the petitioner's claim before the issue of the impugned orders, the original records were sent for.
Mr. Mohunta has produced the relevant file.
A perusal of the records shows that the Chief Administrator in his note of August 27, 1990 has observed as under :  "Since Sh. Sohan Lal SE Technical Vigilance Cell HUDA has been reverted we have to  a) provide a replacement b) make a temporary arrangement till the post is regularly filled up.
a) CM has directed that the vacancy should be filed up by departmental prornotion if some suitable officer is available in the department - HUDA.
At the moment the senior-most officer in HUDA is Sh. SK Dhiman who does not have the essential experience of 7 years as XEN.
Next senior-most officer is JS Chowdhary who has experience of 3 years and 8 months but according to Advocate General, Haryana, his experience of 2 years and 8 months plus one year as current duty charge should be counted as experience against the post of XEN, (earlier LR opinion on the subject is contrary).
If the opinion of AG is accepted, Sh. JS Chowdhary is eligible for the promotion as he has experience of more than 7 years and is the seniormost.
I understand that the Personnel Committee did not consider Shri Dhiman for promotion last time but considered Shri Chowdhary in the panel.
Anyway, this need not be in the way of decision of the matter regarding acting charge which may be given to Shri JS Chowdhary ......  A perusal of the above note shows that the claim of the petitioner was considered on the hypothesis that he was the senior-most officer in HUDA.
It was also observed that he did not have the essential experience of 7 years as Executive Engineer.
Relying on the advice of the Advocate-General, Haryana, it was felt that respondent No. 3 was eligible for promotion as he had the requisite experience of 7 years.
As a result the current duty charge of the post was ordered to be given to respondent No. 3.
In this situation, I am unable to hold that the claim of the petitioner was not considered or that the action is prima facie arbitrary.
9.
It is true that even though this interim arrangement was made as far back as August 27, 1990, the order of regular promotion has not been issued till now.
However, this by itself will not make the action of the authorities arbitrary and unfair.
Keeping in view the fact that an interim arrangement cannot be made to last for ever, and that the petitioner has already completed the requisite period of 7 years, it will be appropriate for the authorities for making regular promotion to the post of Superintending Engineer.
This the authorities shall do within a period of three months from the date of receipt of the copy of this order.
10.
Mr. Khehar relying on the judgment of a Full Bench in Punjab State Electricity Board, Patiala and another v. Ashok Kumar Sehgal and others, AIR 1990 P&H 117 contends that the vacancy had arisen in the year 1990.
On the due date, the petitioner was not eligible.
He contends that even though the petitioner might have become eligible subsequently, he cannot be considered for promotion against that vacancy.
In support of this contention, he relies on two Full Bench decisions in CI Varghese and others v. State of Kerala and others, 1981(2) S.L.J.
309 and Ashok Kumar Sehgal's case (supra) to contend that the petitioner is not eligible.
These are matters which do not fall for consideration at this stage.
These will be kept in view by the appropriate authority while deciding the matter.
In the petition filed by Mr. SK Dhiman, I am not inclined to go into these matters.
11.
Subject to the directions given above I am unable to find any infirmity in the orders impugned in this petition.
The petition is accordingly dismissed.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.