Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner, an Assistant Manager, in the Punjab National Bank was served with a charge-sheet in August, 1987.
After a regular enquiry, the disciplinary authority vide its order dated 26.12.1988 unposed the penalty of compulsory retirement on the petitioner.
A copy of this order has been placed on record as Annexure P-2.
Aggrieved by this order, the petitioner submitted an appeal which was dismissed by the Appellate Authority vide order dated July 18, 1989.
This order has been placed on record as Annexure P-4.
Aggrieved by the orders at Annexures P-2 and P-4, the petitioner has approached this court through the present writ petition.
The orders have been impugned primarily on the ground that the petitioner was not granted a personal hearing by the Appellate Authority and that reasons have not been assigned for rejecting the appeal filed by the petitioner.
2.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents in which the claim of the petitioner has been controverted.
3.
The primary contention raised on behalf of the petitioner is that the Appellate Authority did not grant any opportunity to the petitioner before rejecting the appeal.
Reliance in support of this contention has been placed on the judgment of this Court in S.C Girotra v. United Commercial Bank, 1989(1) S.L.R.
521, which reads as follows :  "The same infirmity of violation of the principles of natural justice crept in at the stage of disposal of the appeal which was a statutory one preferred by the petitioner under Regulation 17 of the aforesaid Regulations, It was the duty of the Appellate Authority to hear the appellant (petitioner) before dismissing the appeal as an objective consideration is possible only if the delinquent employee is heard and given a chance to satisfy the Appellate Authority regarding the final orders that may be passed in his appeal.
This is the requirement of fair play and justice also."
The view taken by the learned Single Judge in S.C Girotra's case (supra) is fully supported by the observations of the Apex Court in Ram Chander v. Union of India and ors., 1986(2) SLR 608 (SC), which are as under :  "It is not necessary for our purposes to go into the vexed question whether a post-decisional hearing is a substitute of the denial of a right of hearing at the initial stage or the observance of the rules of natural justice since the majority in Tulsiram Patel's case, AIR 1985 SC 1416 unequivocally lays down that the only stage at which a Government servant gets a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken in regard to him i.e. an opportunity to exonerate himself from the charge by showing that the evidence adduced at the inquiry is not worthy of credence or consideration or that the charges proved against him are not of such a character as to merit the extreme penalty of dismissal or removal or reduction in rank and that any of the lesser punishments ought to have been sufficient in his case, is at the stage of hearing of a departmental appeal.
Such being the legal position, it is of utmost importance after the Forty Second Amendment as interpreted by the majority in Tulsiram Patel's case that the Appellate Authority must not only give a hearing to the Government servant concerned but also pass a reasoned order dealing with the contentions raised by him in the appeal.
We wish to emphasize that reasoned decisions by tribunals, such as the Railway Board in the present case will promote public confidence in the administrative process.
An objective consideration is possible only if the delinquent servant is heard and given a chance to satisfy the Authority regarding the final orders that may passed on this appeal.
Considerations of fair-play and justice so require that such a personal hearing should be given."
4.
The above observations fully support the contention raised by the petitioner.
The Apex Court has clearly held that the Appellate Authority must not only hear the employee concerned, but has to pass a reasoned order also.
Admittedly, the petitioner was not given a hearing by the Appellate Authority.
On this ground alone, the impugned order, a copy of which has been placed on record as Annexure P-4, is vitiated.
5.
Mr. Nijjar, learned counsel for the respondents contends that under Regulation 17 of Punjab National Bank Officers Employees (Discipline and Appeal) Regulations, 1977, no opportunity of personal hearing is required to be given.
He submits that in view of the provisions of the regulations, it was not incumbent on the Appellate Authority to hear the petitioner before deciding the matter.
He relies on the following observations of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in the case Union of India and anr. v. Tulsiram Patel, 1985(2) SLR 576 (SC) to contend that the principles of natural justice stand excluded :  "Not only, therefore, can the principles of natural justice be modified but in exceptional cases they can even be excluded.
There are well defined exceptions to the nemo judex in cause sua rule as also to the audi alteram partem rule.
The nemo judex in cause sua rule is subject to the doctrine of necessity and yields to it as pointed out by this Court in J Mohapatra and Co v. State of Orissa, (1985)1 SCR 322 : (AIR 1984 SC 1572.
6.
It is no doubt correct that their Lordships of the Supreme Court have observed that the principles of natural justice can be excluded by specific statutory provisions.
However, Tulsi Ram's case has been considered by their Lordships in Ram Chander's case (supra).
Once the Supreme Court has itself interpreted Tulsiram Patel's case it is not open to this Court to take a view different from the one expressed by the Apex Court.
Under Article 141, the law as laid down by their Lordships is binding.
Consequently, we are unable to accept the contention raised by the learned counsel for the respondents.
7.
In view of the law as laid down in Ram Chander's case, we hold that the Appellate Authority was bound to hear the petitioner before rejecting his appeal.
Admittedly, the petitioner was not granted personal hearing.
That being the position, we have no alternative but to quash the order dated July 18, 1989.
8.
The writ petition is accordingly allowed to the extent indicated above.
The Appellate Authority shall decide the appeal afresh after hearing the petitioner.
The needful shall be done within a period of three months from the date of the receipt of a copy of this order.
Under the circumstances of the case, we leave the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.