Ashok Bhan, J - VP Gautam (hereinafter referred to as the appellant), a member of Indian Administrative Service, was allocated to the State of Haryana after the re-organisation of State of Punjab.
He retired from service on attaining the age of superannuation on April 29, 1967.
On retirement, he was eligible to get highest pension under the All India Services (Death-cum-Retirement Benefits) Rules, 1958 (hereinafter referred to as the Rules).
Appellant was allowed pension at the maximum rate of Rs. 675/- per month and death-cum-retirement gratuity (for short 'DCRG') of Rs. 24,000/-.
The rules were amended by notification No. 33/12/73AIS(Il) dated December 24, 1975.
The rules were further amended vide notification dated December 1, 1979.
These two notifications were given effect to from January 1, 1973 and December 31, 1979 respectively.
The ceiling limit of gratuity was fixed at Rs. 30,000/- by first notification.
Similarly, the ceiling limit of maximum pension was raised to Rs. 1500/- per month by the second notification and the ceiling limit of gratuity remained unchanged.
Further amendment in the rules was made vide notification dated February 19, 1981 and a provision was made to the effect that the maximum pension in the case of a member of All India Service who retires from the post of Cabinet Secretary and Secretary to the Council of Ministers, Government of India, was to be Rs. 1700/- per month.
2.
Appellant approached the Accountant General, Punjab and the Department of Personnel and Administrative Reforms in the Cabinet Secretariat of the Union of India for enhancement of his retirement benefits in pursuance to the notifications dated December 24, 1975 and December 1, 1979.
The plea raised by the appellant was not conceded to by the Department.
Appellant filed C.W.P.
No. 4685 of 1975, challenging the validity of Rule 28(6) of the Rules and claimed that he was entitled to the maximum pension admissible under the rules in accordance with the various notifications issued from time to time.
Learned Single Judge of this court held that the provisions contained in Rule 28(6) of the Rules which require that claim of the members of the service to the retirement benefits were to be regulated by the Rules in force at the time he retired from service were violative of Article 14 of the Constitution and thus invalid.
Appellant was consequently granted liberalised pensionary benefits as a result of the amendments made vide 1975 and 1979 notifications irrespective of the fact that the appellant had retired in the year 1967.
Appellant was further held entitled to 12% compound interest on the amount which had been unjustifiably withheld from him.
Writ was issued in the following terms and the learned Single Judge in para 18 of the judgment observed thus :-  Both on principle as also on binding precedent, therefore, it must be held that persons eligible for pension under the Retirement Benefits Rules, 1958 constitute a homogeneous class and the classification or division inter se for eligibility of pension thereunder on retiring from service before or after the specified date was not based on any discernible or rational principle and was also wholly unrelated to the object sought to be achieved by the grant of liberalised pension.
The eligibility criteria for liberalised pension of being in service on the specified date or retiring from service subsequent to that date in order to be entitled to the liberalised pension under the amendments which came into effect in 1975 and 1979 clearly violates Article 14 of the Constitution and must accordingly be struck down.
In other words, the provisions of Rule 28(6) of the Retirement Benefits Rules, 1958 in so far as they tend to restrict pensioner to the retirement benefits as they were entitled on the date of their retirement and seek to deny them liberalised pension under the Amended Rules referred to above which came into effect subsequent to that date are unconstitutional and are also accordingly struck down.
It follows that the liberalised pensionary benefits including death-cum-retirement gratuity granted to pensioners by the amendments made in 1975 and 1979. shall be payable to all persons entitled to pensionary benefits under the Retirement Benefits Rules, 1958 irrespective of the date of the retirement from service."
These observations were eventually followed by mandamus issued in the following terms :-  "In the result, a writ of mandamus is issued to the Union of India and the other respondents directing them to compute and pay pensionary benefits to the petitioner along with interest on the amounts becoming payable to him in terms of this order.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to the costs of this petition."
3.
Union of India filed L.P.A. No. 755 of 1983 which was dismissed by Division Bench of this Court on August 30, 1983.
Special Leave Petition and Civil Appeal Nos. 2738 and 2739, were also dismissed by the Supreme Court on February 12, 1985.
4.
Under the writ issued, the appellant claimed that he was entitled to pension at the rate at which maximum pension was available from time to time whereas the Union of India interpreted the judgment to be that the appellant was entitled to have his pension redetermined according to the liberalised formula given in the rules as amended from time to time.
By applying the formula given in the amended Rules of 1975 and 1979, the pension in the case of the appellant worked out to be somewhat higher amount than the pension originally sanctioned to him and accordingly, the same was paid to him.
It was found that the appellant was not entitled to anything more than what was fixed by the Union of India in pursuance to the writ issued by this Court.
5.
Appellant feeling that he was being deprived of the fruit of the judgment in his favour initiated the second round of litigation and filed an application for contempt of Court on the ground that the writ of mandamus issued was not being complied with.
The contempt petition also came up for hearing before the same learned Single Judge who had decided the aforesaid Civil Writ Petition and had granted the writ in favour of the appellant.
On 2971985, the petition for contempt of court was dismissed by the learned Single Judge holding that the writ issued stood fully complied with.
Appeal filed by the appellant against the dismissal of the petition for contempt of Court was dismissed by the Division Bench of this Court vide order dated August 14, 1987 (Annexure R/3).
Civil Appeal No. 704-(NM) of 1988 filed by the appellant against the Division Bench judgment of this Court in the Supreme Court was also dismissed on March 14, 1988.
The Division Bench after analysing the preceding two paragraphs No. 18 and 23 in VP.
Gautama IAS (Retired) v. Union of India and others, 1983(2) SLR 346 held as under :-  "What is to be discerned is the precise ambit of the mandamus which was issued in the writ petition.
It may be that Shri Gautam claims that in that writ petition, he had sought a mandamus requiring the respondents to grant him pension at the maximum rate admissible in accordance with the various amendments in the Retirement Benefits Rules, 1958, from time to time, but then the question is, whether relief was granted to him as such.
While considering the question as to whether Shri Gautama was precluded from claiming the benefits of subsequent amendments made in the Retirement Benefits Rules, 1958, this Court observed thus :- "Both on principle as also on binding precedent, therefore, it must be held that persons eligible for pension under the Retirement Benefit Rules, 1958, constitute a homogeneous class and the classification or division on inter se for eligibility of pension thereunder on retiring from service before or after the specified date was not based on any discernible or rational principle and was also wholly unrelated to the object sought to be achieved by the grant of liberalised pension.
The eligibility criteria for liberalised pension of being in service the specified date or retiring from service subsequent to that date in order to be entitled to the liberalised pension under the amendments which came into effect in 1975 and 1979 clearly violate Article 14 of the Constitution and must accordingly be struck down.
In other words, the provisions of Rule 28(6) of the Retirement Benefit Rules, 1958 in so far as they tend to restrict pensioners to the retirement benefits as they were entitled on the date of their retirement and seek to deny them liberalised pension under the Amended rules referred to above which came into effect subsequent to that date are unconstitutional and are also accordingly struck down.
It follows that the liberalised pensionary benefits including death-cum-retirement gratuity granted to pensioners by the amendments made in 1975 and 1979 shall be payable to all persons entitled to pensionary benefits under the Retirement Benefits Rules, 1958, irrespective of the date of the retirement from service."
These observations were eventually followed by the mandamus issued in the following words :-  In the result a writ of mandamus is issued to the Union of India and the other respondents directing them to compute and pay pensionary benefits to the petitioner along with interest on the amount becoming payable to him in terms of this order.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to the costs of this petition."
A reading of these aforementioned two observations together clearly implies that this court had issued a mandamus directing the respondents to give pensionary benefits including death-cum-retirement gratuity granted to pensioners by the amendments made in 1975 and 1979 to all persons entitled to such pensionary benefits under the Retirement Benefits Rules, 1958, as amended from time to time, irrespective of date of their retirement from service."
6.
Being still dissatisfied, appellant filed the present application under Order 45 Rule 15 of the Code of Civil Procedure (hereinafter referred to as the code), for the execution of the order passed in the writ petition as affirmed by the Supreme Court.
Appellant claimed Rs. 3,87,91823 on account of arrears of pension and interest and Rs. 1,77,67230 on account of arrears of gratuity and interest.
Appellant had attached details of calculations for arriving at the above figures along with the execution application.
Parawise reply to the above calculations was filed by the State of Haryana and the stand taken was that the appellant was not entitled to claim pension or gratuity at the maximum rate fixed as a result of the amendment of the Rules from time to time and all the Court had held was that the appellant was entitled to pension and gratuity calculated according to the liberalised formula given in the amended Rules from time to time besides interest at the rate of 12% per annum, compounded yearly, on the amount which had been withheld without any reason.
We are not referring to the various details figuratively as the same have been dealt with by the learned Single Judge in his judgment and we are not called upon to discuss those details in this appeal.
No argument of substance was either raised by the appellant regarding the calculations made by the learned Single Judge.
Appellant filed two rejoinders dated January 18, 1989 and April 7, 1989, updating the calculations and claiming compensation for having been deprived of the fruit of the judgment for an inordinate period specially when value of the rupee had gone down sharply.
Reply to those applications was filed by the State.
Learned Single Judge found that the appellant was entitled to pensionary benefits i.e. pension and death-cum- retirement gratuity according to the liberalised rules as amended in 1975 and 1979 but was not entitled to pension at the rate at which maximum pension has been fixed from time to time.
All that the appellant was entitled to was to have his pension redetermined according to libralised formula given in the rules as amended from time to time.
For coming to this conclusion, learned Single Judge relied upon the Division Bench judgment of this Court rendered in the contempt proceedings apart from giving his own reasons for coming to this conclusion.
Learned Single Judge further calculated the amount which was payable to the appellant as per the writ issued by this court and accordingly ordered the payment of the amount so calculated with interest wherever admissible.
7.
The appellant being aggrieved has filed the present appeal and argued that the learned Single Judge materially erred in law in relying upon the findings recorded by the Division Bench of this Court in the contempt proceedings as the fate of contempt proceedings cannot influence the proceedings in execution and further that the said judgment was irrelevant and inadmissible under Section 43 of the Evidence Act.
We do not find any substance in this submission of the appellant.
Proceedings under the Contempt of Courts Act may not be binding upon the executing Court but all the same judgment rendered by the Division Bench of this Court in those proceedings is entitled for due respect while determining as to whether the writ issued by this Court stands complied with or not.
That apart, the learned Single Judge himself came to an independent finding that the appellant was entitled to revised pension and gratuity in accordance with the formula introduced as a result of amendments introduced from time to time and was not entitled to claim pension and gratuity at the maximum rate which was fixed from time to time by the subsequent notifications.
A reading of the judgment rendered by this Court in VP Gautam's case (supra) leaves us with no manner of doubt that the appellant has been extended the benefits granted to him under that writ.
Appellant claims more than what was granted to him under the said writ in accordance with the prayer made by the appellant in his writ petition on the plea that the learned Single Judge could not make a case of his own while granting the relief and the appellant should be deemed to have been granted the relief which was prayed for by him in the writ petition.
We do not accept this submission of the appellant.
It is axiomatic that executing court cannot go behind the decree.
On the same analogy, the executing Court in writ jurisdiction cannot travel beyond the mandamus issued by the Court in writ jurisdiction.
If the appellant is aggrieved for the grant of partial relief or claims further relief which may have become due to him subsequently, it is for him to take appropriate steps in the appropriate forum, if admissible at this stage.
The findings of the learned Single Judge on this point are also affirmed.
Although, we have come to the conclusion that the mandamus issued by this Court in favour of the appellant stands complied with but this does not mean that the government should not extend the benefits due to the appellant if otherwise due apart from the mandamus issued by this Court.
Appellant has relied upon the following judgments :-  (1) State of Kerala and others v. Padmanabhan Nair, AIR 1985 Supreme Court 356.
(2) Deokinandan Prasad v. State of Bihar and others, AIR 1984 Supreme Court 1560.
(3) Sebastian M Hongray v. Union of India, AIR 1984 Supreme Court 1026, and (4) Mitchell v. Mulholland (Widgery LJ), 1971(2) All ER 1205 at page 1217. for claiming exemplary costs for compensation for being deprived of the fruits of the judgment for an inordinate long period and specially when value of the rupee had gone down considerably.
Since we have not agreed with the appellant in principle on the merit of this prayer, we are not inclined to grant any such costs or damages as claimed by the appellant.
The aforementioned judgments under the circumstances shall have no applicability to the facts of the present case.
8.
We have not made an exercise to go into the various detailed calculations which had been done by the learned Single Judge.
Broadly speaking, the appellant did not even challenge the various calculations which had been arrived at by the learned Single Judge.
Thus, the findings of the learned Single Judge on this point as well, are also affirmed.
Consequently, we do not find any merit in this appeal and the same is dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.