AP Chowdhri, J - Facts necessary for the disposal of this writ petition are that the petitioner was working with Punjab State Seeds Corporation, respondent No. 3.
The petitioner filed an application under section 33C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Act') claiming Rs. 95,900/- on account of medical allowance, bonus and difference of pay for the period 1121984 to 191990 in the Labour Court, Patiala.
The respondent-Management was proceeded ex parte on 3.11.1990.
By order dated 5111990, Annexure P-1, the claim of the petitioner was computed as the amount prayed for by him in the application.
On 1681991 the Management filed an application for setting aside the ex parte order on which notice was issued to the workman vide order Annexure P-2 and in the meanwhile operation of the impugned order was stayed.
The petitioner assails the order in so far as it stays the operation of the impugned ex parte order on the ground that the Labour Court is not invested with all the powers of a Civil Court but only those powers which have been enumerated in section 11(3) of the Act.
The question as to the powers of the Labour Court was considered by the apex Court in Grindlays Bank Ltd v. The Central Government Industrial Tribunal and others, AIR 1981 SC 606.
Their Lordships referred to the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 11 of the Act, which may appropriately be reproduced as under :-  "(1) Subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf, an arbitrator, a Board, Court, Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal shall follow such procedure as the arbitrator or other authority concerned may think fit.
(Emphasis added).
Their Lordships laid down as under :-  "It is true that there is no express provision in the Act or the Rules framed thereunder giving the Tribunal jurisdiction to do so.
But it is a well known rule of statutory construction that a Tribunal or body should be considered to be endowed with such ancillary or incidental powers as are necessary to discharge its functions effectively for the purpose of doing justice between the parties.
The words 'shall follow such procedure as the arbitrator or other authority may think fit' occurring in Section 11(1) are of the widest amplitude and confer ample power upon the Tribunal and other authorities to devise such procedure as the justice of the case demands."
In view of the wide amplitude of the powers conferred on the Labour Court under the above quoted provision, there can be no doubt or debate that the Labour Court had the requisite jurisdiction to stay the operation of the ex parte order pending disposal of the application for setting aside the ex parte order.
There being no merit in the writ petition, it is dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.