Harjit Singh Bedi, J - The present writ petition is directed against the award of the Labour Court, appended as Annexure P-6 to the petition, whereby the order of dismissal from service made against the workman-respondent No. 3, has been set aside as being very harsh and a direction has been issued to reinstate the workman with full back wages and continuity of service, but with stoppage of three increments.
2.
The facts relevant to the case are that the workman-respondent No. 3 had been appointed as Helper with the petitioner-company on 2951981 vide letter of appointment issued in that regard on a consolidated salary of Rs. 27150 per month.
It is alleged that on 27.1.1983, respondent No. 3 committed certain grave acts of misconduct, whereupon he was issued a regular charge- sheet.
The reply filed by respondent No. 3 was considered and on it having been found to be unsatisfactory, a regular domestic enquiry was held.
The enquiry officer submitted his report on 231983 in which the charges against respondent No. 3 were held to be proved.
A show-cause notice was thereafter issued to respondent No. 3 and after considering the explanation offered by the respondent, the order of dismissal was made on 631983, Annexure P-3 to the petition.
Aggrieved against the order, Annexure P-3, respondent No. 3 raised a labour dispute and the matter was referred to the Labour Court for adjudication.
The following issues were framed by the Labour Court :  1.
Whether the domestic enquiry is fair and proper ?
2.
Whether the dispute does not fall within the purview of section 2-A of the Industrial Disputes Act ?
3.
As per reference.
After recording evidence and considering the matter, the Labour Court vide its award dated 28.8.1985, Annexure P-6 to the petition, held under issue No. 1 that the domestic enquiry conducted was fair, and proper, but on issue No. 3 recorded a finding that the order of dismissal was unduly harsh as the workman had been victimised and, therefore, required to be given the benefit of section 11-A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter called the 'Act').
Accordingly, the Labour Court ordered reinstatement of the workman- respondent No. 3 with full back wages and continuity of service and the punishment of stoppage of three increments was held to be adequate for the misconduct attributed to him.
The finding with regard to victimisation of the workman-respondent No. 3 was recorded by the Labour Court on the ground that the management was biased against the workman as he had moved an application for the grant of minimum wages to him.
It was also held that prior to 27.1.1983, there had been no occasion for the employer to have had any cause for grievance against the workman-respondent No. 3.
3.
The case, as set out by the petitioner, before me is that the domestic enquiry having been held to be fair and proper by the Labour Court, recourse should not have been taken to section 11-A of the Act as the misconduct attributed to the workman was of a very serious nature as he had resorted to violence and used filthy language against the management and his supervisor, and had also flouted the rules and the standing orders of the organization.
In continuing the argument it has been contended that there was no mala fide intention on the part of the management or the enquiry officer as the application with regard to grant of minimum wages had been filed not only by respondent No. 3 but also by a number of other workmen as well and, as such, there was no question of singling out respondent No. 3 for victimisation.
It has also been contended that the finding of the Labour Court that prior to 27th January, 1983, there had been no occasion in which the behaviour/conduct of respondent No. 3 had been called into question, is also wrong as he had been administered warnings for not doing the work allotted to him.
It has further been urged that section 11-A envisages that a lesser punishment might be imposed on a workman, but as respondent No. 3 had been appointed on a consolidated salary of Rs. 27150 per month, the punishment of stoppage of three increments was meaningless on the facts of the case.
4.
The respondent's counsel has controverted the arguments raised by the counsel for the petitioner and has relied on the award of the Labour Court in order to contend that the reinstatement with other additional benefits ordered by the Labour Court was fully justified.
5.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length.
6.
Mr. AC Jain, learned counsel for the petitioner, has relied on Naktala Iron Works v. The State of W.B.
and others, 1978 Lab.
IC 899 in which the scope of section 11-A of the Act has been succinctly set out.
It has been stated in the aforesaid judgment that the test to be applied in the applicability of section 11-A of the Act is to see whether the punishment imposed was so shockingly disproportionate to the misconduct attributed as would betray malice on the part of the employer, or in other words, one is to see if imposition of a particular punishment is a colourable act on the part of the employer or not.
It was also held, keeping in view the dictum of the Supreme Court in Hind Construction and Engineering Company Limited v. Their Workmen, AIR 1965 SC 917 that what is required to be seen is as to what if reasonable employer would have done in the circumstances of the case, and if a reasonable employer could have imposed the punishment impugned, the Labour Court would not have the power to interfere.
7.
Mr. Harsh Aggarwal, appearing for the workman respondent No. 3, has relied on Scooters India Limited, Lucknow v. Labour Court, Lucknow and others, AIR 1989 SC 149 and Workmen of Bharat Ftitz Werner (P) Ltd. v. Bharat Fritz Werner (P) Ltd and another, 1990 Lab.
IC 844.
In the aforesaid cases the broad ratio of the judgment in Naktala Iron Works' case (supra) has not been modified.
What is to be examined, on the facts of each case, is the nature of the misconduct that has been attributed to the workman.
Coming to the facts of the present case, I find that from the report of the enquiry officer, Annexure P-2 to the petition, six charges were required to be enquired into against respondent No. 3 and all were said to have been proved before the enquiry officer.
It is significant that some of the charges made and proved pertained to the case of abusive and filthy language towards the supervisor and also the commission of an assault against the said functionary while he was coming out of the factory.
No doubt, the charges with regard to coming late on duty or being underproductive would not be said to be of that magnitude so as to justify interference with the award of the Labour Court in the writ jurisdiction, but the charges of abuse and assault are of a different category altogether.
In internal page 5 of Annexure P-2 the abusive language used has been spelt out but for reasons of propriety, the said language is not being reproduced in the judgment.
The charge of beating the Supervisor has also been proved and this, too, is a very serious matter.
On the findings as recorded by the enquiry officer and endorsed by the Labour Court, I find that the misconduct attributed to the workman being of a very serious nature, interference of the Labour Court under section 11-A of the Act was not called for.
8.
The additional arguments raised by the counsel for the petitioner do not call for any finding in view of what has been stated above.
Mr. Harsh Aggarwal, counsel for respondent No. 3, has argued that the enquiry itself is vitiated on account of the fact that he was not associated with it and was not allowed to take the help of a co-worker as required by the rules.
This argument also has no force, as it cannot be taken at this stage of the proceedings.
Moreover, as per the report of the enquiry officer, respondent No. 3 had made a demand that he wished to have the help of Shri Amar Singh Rana, but the same was declined as the said individual was an outsider and not an employee of the petitioner.
It appears that thereafter the petitioner did not associate himself with the enquiry proceedings despite having been repeatedly called upon to do so.
9.
Having held as above, the question now arises as to what would be the ultimate result of this case.
I asked the counsel for the petitioner if his party was willing to compensate respondent No. 3 monetarily.
He agreed to do so for a sum of Rs. 30,000/-.
The present writ petition is, therefore, allowed and the award of the Labour Court ordering reinstatement of respondent No. 3 with full back wages and continuity of service is quashed.
However, a direction is issue to the petitioner to pay a sum of Rs30,000/- by way of a demand draft as also to make all the payments due upto date to respondent No. 3 as envisaged under section 17-B of the Act.
The said payment will be made within a period of four weeks from today.
Keeping in view the facts and circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.