Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - The petitioner was an employee of M/s Jagjit Industries, Jagjit Nagar.
He was dismissed from service w.e.f.
26th March, 1975, after holding a domestic enquiry.
On a dispute raised by the workman, the matter was referred to the Labour Court, Jalandhar for adjudication whether the termination of services of the petitioner workman was justified and in order.
If so, to what relief/exact amount of compensation was he entitled.
2.
The Labour Court, Jalandhar, vide its award dated 2451979 awarded a compensation of Rs. 2,000/- to the workman in lieu of reinstatement taking into consideration that he had served respondent No. 1 for about 8 years, whereas his claim for reinstatement was not accepted by the Labour Court.
3.
Feeling aggrieved against the impugned award of the Labour Court, the petitioner has filed the present writ petition.
He has challenged the impugned award on the ground that once the court arrived at a conclusion that the termination of the petitioner workman was not justified and in order, the back wages cannot be denied.
4.
On the other hand, the plea raised by the Management-respondent No. 1 is that there was serious allegations against the workmen and it had lost confidence in him as he had made fraudulent payments.
It was further contended that the Labour Court had awarded sufficient compensation in lieu of reinstatement.
5.
On a consideration of the matter, I am not inclined to consider the question of reinstatement of the petitioner in view of the fact that there were serious allegations of fraud and embezzlement against the workman- petitioner.
From the perusal of the award of the Labour Court, it is observed that the workman-petitioner had lost confidence of his employer, respondent No. 1.
As such, it would not be proper to thrust him upon the Management.
6.
The only question remains for consideration in this petition is whether adequate compensation was awarded to the petitioner, who had served the Management-respondent No. 1 for about 8 years.
The petitioners' services were dispensed with on 2631975, whereas the dispute was referred to by the State of Punjab vide its order dated 24.7.1975 and the Labour Court had given its award on 24th May, 1979.
Taking into account the salary of Rs. 183/- which he was drawing at the time of his removal from service, it would have been appropriate if the-petitioner was given at least the salary for a period of four years by way of compensation.
In my view, the compensation of Rs. 2,000/- awarded by the Labour Court was not just and reasonable.
The ends of justice would be well met if he is granted a sum of Rs. 10,000/- in lump sum.
7.
The writ petition is disposed of with the direction that respondent No. 2 shall pay a sum of Rs. 8,000/- more to the petitioner in addition to a sum of Rs. 2,000/- already awarded by the Labour Court, within two months from the receipt of a copy of this order.
No order as to costs.
Order accordingly.