Anil Dev Singh, J - This is an application for grant of an ad interim injunction under Order 39 rules 1 and 2 CPC.
2.
The plaintiffs case in so far as it is material for the disposal of this application is as follows : The first plaintiff is a Government Company incorporated under the Companies Act, 1956 with the object of managing, controlling, and operating telephone and telex services in Delhi and Bombay.
Defendant No. 1 which is a trade union started raising demands for framing and finalising of service conditions of the employees of the plaintiff.
On March 18, 1987 defendant No. 1 sent a notice to the plaintiff raising demands and also extending threats that in case the demands were not met, the former would resort to agitational programme.
On receipt of the notice the plaintiff filed a suit being Suit No. 1215/87 in this court for permanent injunction for restraining the defendants from holding Dharna or demonstration within the premises of the Corporate office.
That suit was also accompanied by an application under Order 39 rules 1 and 7 CPC.
This court by an ex parte order dated June 5, 1987 restrained the defendants from holding Dharna.
Thereafter the said ex parte injunction was made absolute.
However, the suit was withdrawn as according to the plaintiff the defendants had given an assurance that they would not hold any demonstration at the office of the Managing Director of the plaintiff Corporation.
Again in February, 1988 the defendants held out another threat of mass dharna which resulted in filing of another suit by the plaintiff in this court in which an ad interim order restraining the defendants from holding any such dharna at the offices of the first plaintiff was passed.
3.
On April 18, 1989, the plaintiff again withdrew the suit in view of the assurance given by the defendants that they will not indulge in any kind of demonstration.
Thereafter defendant No. 1 issued another letter dated September 5, 1989 to the Managing Director of the plaintiff - Corporation whichted to the present suit.
In this letter it was stated that the Corporation has not solved the problems of the employees for a long period which has generated dissatisfaction.
The letter goes on to add that after thorough consideration, it was decided to launch "progressive agitational programme".
A demand letter was also enclosed with this communication.
The relevant portion of the demand letter is reproduced below :-  "1.
Dharna and Rally at all Telephone Exchanges on 21889 2.
Dharna and Rally at the office of Chief General Manager on 28989.
3.
Dharna and Rally at the office of Managing Director on 5101989."
4.
In view of the threat of holding dharna and rally at the offices of the Chief General Manager and the Managing Director, the plaintiff apprehending danger to its personnel and property filed the present application which is supported by an affidavit.
The defendants, on the other hand, denied threat of any injury or danger to any personal and property of the plaintiff.
However, it is not denied that on September 28, 1989 the defendants, after holding' dharna and rally at the office of the Chief Genera Manager, announced their plan to hold dharna in the office of Managing Director on October 5, 1989.
It is alleged that inflammatory speeches were made and senior officers of the plaintiff were threatened.
In addition the case of the plaintiff is that filthy and defamatory slogans were also raised and the proposed demonstration on October 5, 1989 was styled as final war.
These allegations have again been denied by the defendants in their written statement as also in the reply to the present application.
5.
On October 4, 1989 this court by an ex parte order restrained the defendants from holding any dharna or making any demonstration within a radius of 100 metres or the outer gates of Jeevan Bharati Building, New Delhi and Khurshed Lal Bhavan, Janpath, New Delhi, wherein the offices of the plaintiff and its Chief General Manager are located.
The defendants were further restrained from obstructing the ingress or egress of the officers or members of the staff of the plaintiff.
Now after the filing of the reply and replication the matter has come up for final disposal of application.
6.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have also perused the record.
Three questions were raised which need to be thrashed out at this stage :  Question No. 1.
Whether the suit is barred under the provisions of Section 19 of the Administrative Tribunal Act and Section 34 of the Industrial Disputes Act;  Question No. 2.
Whether fresh suit is not maintainable under Order 23 rules 1 and 2 CPC; and  Question No. 3.
What is the nature and the extent of the right to hold demonstration and whether this right is an absolute right i.e. a right to propagandise protest, whenever, howsoever and wherever the union pleases.
7.
I have given my earnest and careful consideration to the question raised and proceed to deal with them.
Question No. 1.
8.
Learned counsel for the defendants argued that since the suit is not maintainable in view of Section 34 of the Industrial Disputes Act and Section 19 of the Administrative Tribunals Act, no relief could be granted to the plaintiff in the present application.
Learned counsel submitted that according to plaintiff the defendants were indulging in unfair labour practice and this was a matter within the jurisdiction of a Labour court.
A similar argument was advanced in the case ofM/s.
The Association of State Road Transport Undertakings v. The Association of State Road Transport Undertaking Employees Union (Regd.)
& others, 1986 Lab.
IC 1343, which was not accepted.
In this regard this court held as under :  "8.
Section 9 of the Civil P.C.
reads as under :- "9.
The courts shall (subject to the provisions herein contained) have jurisdiction to try all suits of a civil nature excepting suits of which their cognizance is either expressly or impliedly barred".
Therefore, the general rule is that Civil Court has jurisdiction in respect of every matter of Civil Court.
There is no doubt that the present suit involves matters of civil nature.
There is no provision in the Industrial Disputes Act which expressly or impliedly bars the jurisdiction of the Civil Court in respect of taking cognizance of the matters involved in this suit.
The word unfair labour practice is defined in S. 2(ra) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
That says that unfair labour practice means any of the practices specified in the Fifth Schedule.
The Fifth Schedule, inter alia, says that staging of demonstrations at the residences of the employers or the managerial staff members or to indulge in act of force or violence or to hold out threats or intemidation etc., are unfair labour practice.
Therefore the allegations of the plaintiff disclose commission of unfair labour practice by the defendants.
But that does not take away the jurisdiction of the Civil Court.
An unfair labour practice is an offence according to S 25 U of the Industrial Disputes Act.
The learned counsel for the defendants relied upon S. 34 of the said act which says that no court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under the Act except on complaint made by or under the authority of the appropriate government.
The learned counsel contended that that debarred the Civil Court from taking cognizance in respect of any unfair labour practice which is an offence.
But that argument has no force because S. 34 is in respect of taking cognizance by Criminal Courts.
That does not debar a Civil Court from taking cognizance of a matter of civil nature such as the one in the present case".
In view of this judgment it is not open to the defendant to contend that Section 34 of the Industrial Disputes Act bars the jurisdiction of the civil Court.
9.
In so far as the argument of the defendants based on Section 19 of the Administrative Tribunals Act is concerned, I do not see any justification in holding that the jurisdiction of the civil Court would be barred in a matter of this nature.
It is well settled that the exclusion of civil courts jurisdiction is not to be lightly inferred.
Exclusion must either be explicit or clearly implied in the statute.
According to Section 9 of the CPC all suits of civil nature except the suits whose cognizance is either expressly or impliedly barred would be triable by the civil courts.
Reference may be had to Food Corporation of India and another v. Yadav Engineer and Contractor, AIR 1982 SC 1302 (Para 4) and Noor Mohd.
Khan Ghouse Khan v. Fakirappa Bharmappa Machenahalli, AIR 1978(3) SCC 188.
[Paras 25 and 26]  10.
There is also nothing in Section 19 of Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 which either explicitly or impliedly bars jurisdiction of the civil courts to deal with the matter arising out of demonstration and dharna by the employees.
In this view of the matter the contention of the defendants is rejected.
Question 2 :  11.
This question raised by the learned counsel for the defendants has no merit.
The charter of demands circulated on September 5, 1989 gives a fresh cause of action to the plaintiff and the withdrawal of the earlier suits will not come in its way to file the present suit.
The argument is without force and as such as rejected.
Question No. 3  12.
It is well known that holding of demonstration is part and parcel of right to freedom of speech and expression and is also bound up with guarantee to assemble peacefully and freedom to form associations as contemplated by clauses (a), (b) & (c) of Article 19 of the Constitution.
(See : Kameshwar Prasad and others v. State of Bihar and another AIR 1962 SC 1166).
Demonstration for purposes of trade union activities is a powerful mechanism to display group feelings towards a cause and for redressal of the grievances.
Again this device for expressing and disseminating views acts as a safety value in Industrial relations when properly resorted to as it is a means to let off steam.
It is no doubt important to maintain industrial peace but it may prove allusive and a far cry by shutting out legitimate trade union activities including demonstration as the dam of pent up feelings might burst causing permanent damage to the cause of industrial peace.
While individual protest for legitimate grievances may be inaudible and ignored, demonstration by a collective body of persons may have the desired effect on the employer.
The importance of the right lies in its universal acceptance by the civilised nations of the world and has now become a basic right and a fundamental liberty.
Article 50 of the Constitution of the USSR reads :  "In accordance with the interests of the people and in order to strengthen and develop the socialist system, citizens of the USSR are guaranteed freedom of speech of the members and of assembly, making street procession and demonstration."
Similarly first amendment to the Constitution of America declares as follows :-  "Congress shall make no law abridging the freedom of speech or the right of the people peaceably to assemble ........" In Article 11 of the French Declaration of the Rights of Men and Citizens 1789, the freedom of opinion was proclaimed as a human right.
In the 19th Century the German States also guaranteed the freedom of opinion.
Even during constitutional monarchy in Germany dissemination of opinion was perceptible Article 30 of the Universal Declaration of the Human Rights of the UNO while embodying the said freedom declares as follows :-  "Everyone has the right to freedom of peaceful as assembly and association ........." Thus this area of law is closely connected with the exercise of fundamental liberty of the subject and is extremely important to be preserved and nurtured.
History shows that this liberty of the subject has been won after much labour, pain suffering and anguish all over the world and must be given its full play subject to the restrictions imposed in the constitution itself.
Having said so, I must hasten to add that, "it is no doubt correct that freedom of speech and free assembly has taken firm roots in this country and is a valuable right and the court would be loathe to interfere with the said freedom nevertheless it must intervene whenever need arises to protect the interest of the society for its collective good.
Fundamental freedoms under Article 19 of the Constitution are not absolute and the grounds on which they can be restricted by the state, unlike the first amendment to the Constitution of America where freedom enshrined therein are subject to police powers, are clearly spelt out in our Constitution."
13.
In the present case the situation is that the defendants assert a right to stage a dharna and a rally in the offices of the plaintiff itself.
According to the plaintiff such a dharna and rally was held on September 21, 1989 and September 28, 1989 in the telephone exchanges and in the office of the Chief General Manager (See Para 14 of the plaint).
Again in para 15 of the plaint it is stated that the defendants announced their plan to hold dharna and rally in the office of the Managing Director on October 5, 1989.
These facts have not been denied by the defendants rather the demand letter also spells out the same plan of action.
The plaintiff claims that the defendants have no such right and the ex parte order should be maintained.
14.
It must be remembered that the plaintiff runs a public utility service for operating and managing all tale communication system in the city of Delhi.
A grave responsibility lies on the plaintiff to keep this important and essential channel of communication open.
Like a private owner of property it has also the power to preserve the property under its control for use to which it is dedicated.
It cannot be exercised in derogation of a right of someone who has right to held the property.
No one can be allowed to exercise his right so as to prejudice the exercise of a right of another.
This inherent limitation of a legal right in my opinion extends to fundamental rights as well though it may not be possible to test the same on the anvil of sub articles (2) & (3) of article 19.
There is no right to freedom to hold a demonstration including a sit in demonstration in porpoety belonging to another.
The work in public offices must go on smoothly in the national interest.
National interest which is the highest law and to which every other thing is subservient.
All our words, deeds and thoughts must measure up to this yardstick.
If demonstrations are allowed inside the office, it will not be possible to transact any business and would encourage mobocracy and intimidation.
In Railway Board, New Delhi and another v. Niranjan Singh, AIR 1969 SC 966, the Supreme Court while not granting the plea of the railway servants to hold meeting in railway premises held as under :  "12.
It was not disputed that the Northern Railway is the owner of the premises in question.
The fact that the Indian Railways are state undertakings does not affect their right to enjoy their properties in the same manner as any private individual may do subject only to such restrictions as the law or the usage may place on them.
Hence unless it is shown that either under law or because of some usage the railway servants have a right to hold their meetings in railway premises, we see no basis for objectioning to the direction given by the General Manager.
There is no fundamental right for anyone to hold meetings in government premises.
If it is otherwise there is bound to be chaos in our offices.
The fact that those who work in a public office can go there does not confer on them the right of holding a meeting at that office even if it be the most convenient place to do so.
13.
It is true that the freedoms guaranteed under our Constitution are very valuable freedoms and this court would resist abridging the ambit of those freedoms except to the extent permitted by the Constitution.
The fact that the citizens of this country have freedom of speech, freedom to assemble peaceably and freedom to, form associations or unions does not mean that they can exercise those freedoms in whatever place they please.
The exercise of those freedoms will come to an end as soon as the right of someone else to hold his property intervenes.
Such a limitation is inherent in the exercise of those rights.
The validity of that limitation is not to be judged by the tests prescribed by sub-Articles (2) an (3) of Article 19.
In other words the contents of the freedoms guaranteed under clauses (a), (b) and (c), the only freedoms with which we are concerned in this appeal, do not include the rights to exercise them in the properties belonging to others.
If Mr. Garg is right in his contentions then a citizen of this country in the exercise of his right under Clauses (d) and (e) of Article 19 (1) could move about freely in a public office or even reside there unless there exists some law imposing reasonable restrictions on the exercise of those rights".
In M/s.
The Association of State Road Transport Undertakings v. The Association of State Road Transport Undertaking Employees Union (Regd.)
and others (supra) this court held that every citizen of India has freedom of speech, freedom to assemble peacefully and freedom to form association or unions but there was a limit to the exercise of such fundamental rights inasmuch as there was no right to hold meetings and shout slogans at a premises legally occupied by another.
15.
The submission that the defendants have a right to hold the demonstration within the premises of the plaintiff and in the offices mentioned above is in my view untenable.
Again freedom of speech and free assembly cannot mean that the right can be exercised wherever, whenever and howsoever.
16.
Accordingly, I hold that the defendants have no right to hold demonstration in the office premises of the plaintiff.
17.
Now as regards location where the demonstration should be permitted the court has to balance the scales so that this important freedom is restricted only to the extent needed to preserve the proper and efficient functioning of the public utility service and to the point that it does not interfere with the ability of members of the public to use public office.
The equation must be properly balanced so that the right of the defendants to enjoy this freedom under clauses (a), (b) & (c) of Article 19 of the Constitution of India is not rendered illusory or nugatory and at the same time the public interest also does not suffer.
Having regard to the nature of the right and the facts and circumstance of the case I am prima facie of the opinion that during the pendency of the suit the defendants' right to hold demonstration may only be restricted to holding any dharna or making an demonstration beyond a radius of 50 metres from the gates of Jeevan Bharati Building, New Delhi and Khursheed Lal Bhavan, Janpath, New Delhi.
However, it must being stated that everyone is entitled to go to work and earn his wages without be prevented or obstructed or intimidated.
Accordingly the emonstrators will not prevent, obstruct or intimidate the workers or employees going into the said premises or coming out of the same.
This shall also apply to those who visit the premises for transacting their business.
Further the demonstrators while ventilating their grievances shall not use abusive language as such kind of expressions fall outside the content and reach of Article 19(1)(a) and would be beyond its protective shield.
18.
Accordingly Ex parte order dated October 4, 1989 is made absolute with the modification that : (a) the defendants-respondents are restrained from holding demonstration including to sit in demonstration within a radius of 50 metres from the gates of Jeevan Bharati Building, New Delhi and Khursheed Lal Bhavan, Janpath, New Delhi and not beyond it and (b) the defendants will neither obstruct or intimidate the workers or its employees or members of the public going into the premises or coming out of the same nor use or shout abusive slogans.
The application stands disposed of.
Appeal disposed of.