Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The termination of the workmen involved in these writ petitions has been held to be illegal.
Yet the back wages have been declined on the ground that the strike was illegal and the employer had to employ substitutes.
The petitioners claim that the strike was legal and the action of the Labour Court in declining to award back wages is illegal.
The position in C.W.P.
No. 125 of 1986 is slightly different.
However, all the 17 petitions, viz CWP Nos. 125, 1104, 1309, 2143, 2148-49, 2179-80, 2439, 2441-43, 4540-41, 4543, 4556 and 6297 of 1986 shall be disposed of by this judgment.
2.
To appropriate the controversy, the facts as stated in C.W.P.
No. 4541 of 1986 alone may be noticed.
The petitioner was working as a Secretary with the Baghapurana Cooperative Agriculture Service Society Ltd, Baghapurana in district Faridkot (for short 'the society').
The employees of the Society have formed a Union.
This union served a demand notice on the Government.
A copy of this notice has been placed on record as Annexure P-1.
In this notice it was, inter alia, mentioned that if the demands of the employees were not accepted, they would resort to non-cooperation with effect from May 1, 1981.
When the petitioner and other employees came to Chandigarh for peaceful dharna, they were arrested and kept in custody for 4-5 months.
On account of this reason, they were unable to attend to their duties.
In the meantime, the Society terminated the services of the petitioners by an order dated May 27, 1981.
The termination of services of the petitioners led to a reference to the Labour Court.
The Labour Court by its award dated September 30, 1985 held that the termination of the services of the workmen was unjustified.
It, however, did not award any backwages on the ground that the strike was illegal and unjustified and that the respndent-society, had to employ fresh hands for continuing the work.
Aggrieved by the action of the Labour Court in not awarding back wages, the petitioners have filed the present writ petition.
3.
No written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
4.
Mr. JC Verma, learned counsel for the petitioners has contended that the workmen had raised certain demands.
When the employer failed to do the needful, they : had served a notice informing the employer that they would resort to non-cooperation.
He submits that even if the Society is presumed to be rendering public utility services, the strike could not have been held to be illegal.
He further submits that a short question referred to the Labour Court was as to whether or not the termination of the services of the workmen was justified or not.
He states that the question of the legality or otherwise of the strike had not been referred to the Labour Court, and as such, the finding recorded by the Labour Court in that behalf was wholly illegal.
He also submits that the Labour Court erred in going into the matter without framing an issue in that behalf and thereby denied to the workmen an opportunity to lead evidence for the purpose of showing that the strike was legal.
In any case, the learned counsel contends that the termination having been found to be illegal, the workmen were entitled to the payment of back wages and the Labour Court had acted illegally in denying wages to the petitioners.
5.
A copy of the award has been produced as Annexure P-2 with the writ petition.
The Labour Commissioner, Punjab had referred the following matter to the Labour Court :-  "Whether termination of services of Sher Singh workman is justified and in order ?
If not to what relief/exact amount of compensation is he entitled ?"
After examining the pleadings of the parties, the Labour Court had framed the following three issues :-  "1.
Whether the order of termination of services of the workman is justifiable at law and in order ?
2.
Whether the reference is not maintainable for the reasons mentioned in the preliminary objections of the written statement ?
3.
Relief."
After framing these issues, the learned Labour Court observed that the workman had not led any evidence to show as to whether there was any justification for the strike.
The charter of demands had not been produced and it could not be judged as to whether or not the demands were reasonable.
Accordingly, it was held that the strike was illegal and unjustified.
6.
The learned Labour Court had not framed any issue regarding the validity of the strike.
This could normally lead the workmen to believe that he was not required to lead any evidence with regard to the legality or Justifiability of the strike.
Mr. Verma appears to be right in his submission that since there was no specific issue regarding the legality of the strike, the workman had not led any evidence.
If an issue had been framed and an opportunity had been given, the petitioner could have shown that in fact a notice of strike along with a charter of demands had been duly served on the employer.
He could have further shown that notice of strike had in fact been given.
In fact, the notice at Annexure P-1 does indicate that the workman had conveyed the intention of the Union to resort to non-cooperation.
Even the charter of demands had been duly served.
At least averment in this behalf made in the petition has not been rebutted.
That being so, the reasons taken into consideration by the Labour Court in holding that the strike was illegal and unjustified could have been reasonably met.
In fact, Mr. Verma submits that provisions of Section 22 of the Industrial Disputes Act had been duly complied with.
He also submits with greater vehemence that the notification declaring the activities of the Society to be a public utility service had in fact expired to May 7, 1980 and that there was in fact no notification of the day the workman went on strike viz, May 11, 1980.
He further states that the workman could have proved that he was taken into custody on May 11, 1980 and detained without any trial etc. for a period of 4-5 months.
It was on account of this reason that the workman had remained absent from duty.
Whatever be the factual position, the workman had a reasonably cogent explanation and if the Labour Court had framed an issue in that behalf, the workman could have led evidence in support of his stand.
Since no issue was framed regarding the legality or justifiability of the strike, the workman did not lead any evidence.
In this situation, the Labour Court, in my view was not entitled to record a finding that the strike was illegal and unjustified.
7.
It is well settled that no amount of evidence can be looked into on a matter which is not in issue between the parties.
No issue regarding the validity of the strike having been framed, even if some evidence had been led on behalf of the respondent-Society, it could not have been looked into by the Labour Court.
That being the position, the finding in this behalf as recorded by the Labour Court is untenable.
8.
The workman was not served with any charge-sheet.
No enquiry was held.
His termination, as such, was wholly unjustified.
In such a situation, the workman should have normally been held entitled to the payment of full back wages.
The fact that the society had to employ somebody else does not disentitle the petitioner from getting back wages.
In fact, the payment of backwages is the normal rule.
Exception is made only if circumstances showing negligence on the part of the workman is brought on record.
In the present case, the mere fact that the society had to employ somebody else could not disentitle the workman from getting backwages.
I consequently hold that the workman was entitled to backwages.
9.
In C.W.P.
No. 125 of 1986 the society has approached this court with the grievance that the strike having been held to be illegal, the order of reinstatement could not have been passed.
The factual position in the case is indentical.
There was no issue regarding the validity of the strike.
In such a situation, the finding of the Court that the strike was illegal and unjustified cannot be sustained.
That being so, the order of reinstatement is perfectly justified.
I find no infirmity in the award.
10.
As a result CWP Nos. 1104, 1309, 2143, 2148-49, 2179-80, 2439, 2441-43, 4540-41, 4543 and 4556 of 1986 are allowed and it is held that the workmen shall be entitled to the payment of back wages.
C.W.P.
No. 125 of 1986 is, however, dismissed.
There shall be no orders as to costs.
Keeping in view the fact that the workmen shall get wages without doing any work, I am not awarding any interest to them.
Petition allowed.