VK Bali, J - The petitioner-the Sirhind Cooperative Marketing-cum Processing Society Ltd., Sirhind has challenged the award annexure P-1, rendered by Shri PC Singal, Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Patiala, dated 13th April, 1986, vide which the respondent workman Ajaib Singh was ordered to be reinstated with continuity of service.
The order dated 16th July, 1974, terminating his services, was set aside but he was held not entitled for back wages till 8th of December, 1981, the date when he had served a demand notice on the management.
The facts giving rise to the petition so as to challenge the impugned award may be enumerated.
The services of the respondent workman were terminated by the petitioner society on 16th July, 1974.
The reasons, as stated, is that the work of the petitioner society had decreased considerably, inasmuch the services of the petitioner and others were no more required as also for the reasons that respondent-workman was guilty of embezzling an amount of Rs. 2,08,36486 as salesman.
The petitioner society was left with no choice but to dispense with the services of the petitioners and others who were found surplus.
With a view to recover the embezzled amount from the respondent workman, the petitioner society prepared arbitration cases against him, under Sections 55/56 of the Punjab Cooperative Societies Act, 1961, and the same were pending determination before the authorities of the Cooperative Department.
The case of the petitioner society is that the workman, after he was relieved, had gone to Iran, which fact came to its notice after passing of the award by the Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Patiala.
However, the workman had served demand notice, for the first time, on the management on 8th December, 1981 wherein he had claimed reinstatement and styled the order of his termination passed as far back as 1974, as illegal.
Obviously, on account of the failure recorded by the Conciliation Officer, the matter was referred to the Govt. which, in turn referred the same for adjudication to Labour Court, Patiala.
It is positive case of the petitioner-society that it has raised the point of delay in seeking reinstatement at the hand of respondent-workman before the Presiding Officer, Labour Court.
It was specifically mentioned in the written statement that the claim of the workman-respondent could not be entertained at such a belated stage, particularly when he himself was guilty of non-action for the period of over 7 years.
The matter was not left in the realm of raising an objection in the written statement in reply to a written claim of the workman, but even evidence was led on the point and submissions before the Labour Court were also.
It is contended that the respondent-workman himself admitted in his statement before the Labour Court, Patiala on January 10, 1986 that the arbitrator had passed the order/award dated October 11, 1985 against him and that he was present before the arbitrator on the date when the award was given and also on earlier dates.
So-much-so, the workman himself produced on record the award dated October 11, 1985.
The points as fully detailed above were taken to the logical end, but somehow, the Labour Court while defending its award did not advert to the same resulting into failure.
2.
On the basis of averments made in the petition before this Court as also on the basis of affidavit Annexure P-2 filed in this Court, it is vehemently contended by the learned counsel appeaing for the petitioner-society that the Labour Court ought to have gone into this crucial question of delay and by ignoring the point completely, a grave injustice has been caused to the petitioner-society.
Although there was nothing on the record so as to disbelieve the sworn affidavit of Mr. KVS Sood, the authorised-representative of the management, the point with regard to belated, demand of the respondent-workman and consequences thereof could be gone into even now by this Court, contends learned counsel.
3.
Mr. Brar, learned counsel appearing for the respondent-workman on the other hand contends that a perusal of the award Annexure P-1 would clearly show that the question of delay and consequence of the same was not even remotely agitated before the Labour Court and, therefore, this Court in its writ jurisdiction could not examine this question.
He asserts that this plea is basically a question of fact, on which there was serious dispute and the same could not be gone into at this stage.
The assertion of the petitioner-society with regard to embezzlements was denied and the statement said to have been made by the workman before the Labour Court was also refuted.
4.
The crucial question for determination in the present petition is as to whether it is appropriate in the facts and circumstances of the present case to examine the validity of the pointsraised by the counsel for the management.
It is true that preeminently it is a question of fact and if the matter was not agitated before the Labour Court, this Court would be slow to interfere with the findings recorded by the Labour Court, in its writ jurisdiction.
However, the totality of the circumstances clearly go to show that the question of delay was raised before the Labour Court.
In any case, the Point agitated before this Court requires no further evidence and it is patent on the face of the record.
It is not denied that the services of the respondent-workman were terminated by the petitioner-society on July 16, 1974.
It is also not denied that the workman served a demand-notice on the management on December 8, 1981 ie after more than 7 years.
In facts and circumstances of the present case it would be rather in the interest of justice to examine the point raised by the learned counsle for the petitioner-society and determine the same.
In so far as the question of embezzlement alleged against the workman is concerned, it is true that no evidence is led with regard to embezzlement as such, but there is the statement of workman dated January 10, 1986 available on the records of the Labour Court and it would be useful to reproduce the same as under :-  "........ stated that the arbitrator passed the award dated 11101985 against me and I was present before him on that date as well as on the earlier dates.
I produce award dated 11101985...".
On January 10, 1986 the statement of Mr. KVS Sood, authorised representative of the management was recorded, who, in view of the statement made by the workman Ajaib Singh did not press his application for additional evidence and the same was adjourned for arguments.
It is clear from the aforesaid two statements that the management made an application for additional evidence to prove on record the orders passed by the arbitrator against the workman Ajaib Singh, that as a matter of fact, in his capacity as salesman, the workman was liable to pay the awarded amount to the petitioner- society, which he did not account for.
The averments made in paragraph 4 of the writ petition that the workman had remained in Iran after his services were terminated, has also not been specifically denied in corresponding paragraph of the written statement.
5.
The facts detailed above would justify the stand of the counsel for the petitioner-society to examine the question of delay of more than 7 years in serving the demand notice on the management and consequences thereof.
On the strength of the observations made by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India, in Shalimar Works Ltd v. Its Workmen, 1959(11) L.L.J.
(SC) 26 it has been forcefully contended by the management that it will be inequitous to grant any relief to the workman who slept over the matter for more than 7 years and raised demand and ultimately was successful in getting an order of reference under Section 10 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, for determination by the Labour Court.
On the other hand, Mr. Brar, supporting the cause of the workman, has relied upon the observations made by the Supreme Court in Jai Bhagwan v. Management of Ambala Central Cooperative Bank Ltd, A.I.R. 1984 SC 286 and contends that at the most having regard to the circumstances that the workman raised an industrial dispute after considerable delay without doing anything in the meanwhile to question termination of his services, the claim of the workman may be refuted qua back wages but, in so far as the question of reinstatement was concerned, the same could not be invalidated for the reason that while terminating the services of the workman no procedure, at all, was followed.
It is true that in the case relied upon by Mr. Brar only half back wages were given to the workman from the date of termination of his services, whereas in the present case full back wages have been given from the date the workman raised the demand and in so far as retrenchment was concerned, the same was proved to be against law and the management had not followed any procedure as required under the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act.
However, perusal of the judgment cited by Mr. Brar would show that the workman was informed in 1975 that his services had been terminated with immediate effect and that there was no information available with the counsel of the workman to pin-point any date when the steps might have been taken by the workman to challenge the order of his termination.
The Industrial Dispute was, however, referred vide order dated December 15, 1980.
The crucial question to my mind is as to whether when the workman himself slept over the matter for long years and raked up the matter without any kind of explanation whatsoever should he be reinstated.
In present case, the delay is mainly attributed to the workman and it is not a case delay that occurred on account of fault of the Goverment in making the reference at a late stage.
It is proved that on facts the case of Jai Bhagwan (supra) making the delay in demand is apparent, but when did the workman raise the dispute is not clear.
In the present case, however, as has been fully narrated above, there is absolutely no dispute that for the first time the workman raised the dispute by serving a demand notice on the management after a period of 7-1/2 years.
If the workman had felt that the order of termination of his services was illegal as no precedure at all was followed, he could have come up with a demand notice within some reasonable time.
It is true that there is no limitation prescribed for raising dispute to Industrial Tribunal or Labour Court, but it would be only then reasonable that the dispute should be referred as soon as possible and after conciliation proceedings have failed.
To reopen the matter after such a long time and that too without giving any explanation of delay would be too inequitous had a great disadvantage of the management.
It is settled law that even though the management has held no domestic enquiry or if the domestic enquiry is defective it shall be open to it to prove the guilt of the workman before the Court itself.
In case management takes such a stand, which is permissible under the law, it would be practically impossible to collect evidence after so many years.
The peculiar facts of this case, in my considered opinion, would not warrant any relief to the workman who slept over the matter for 7 years and confronted the management at such a belated stage when it may not have been possible for it to prove his guilt.
Reinstatement of the workman at this stage would make total injustice to the petitioner-society which happens to be a Cooperative Society.
6.
I am, in the facts and circumstances of the present case, not inclined to grant any relief to the workman.
The Labour Court did not go into this question even, as per the case of the management, the point was raised before it and submissions were also made at the time of arguments.
Be.
that as it may, the workman is not entitled to any relief and, if that be so, the award Annexure P-1 rendered by the Labour Court requires to be set aside.
In the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case, there shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.