RS Mongia, J (Oral) - Petitioner Vijay Pal was appointed as a Mate with Palwal Co-operative Sugar Mills Ltd, Palwal, district Faridabad, on 181984 on daily wages at the rate of Rs. 13/- per day; Later on, on 26.2.1984, he was given a regular grade of Rs. 334-2-352-3-394 and was kept as a regular Mate with effect from 2041985.
On 2131986, according to the petitioner, when he reported for duty with the management, he was verbally told that his services stood terminated and he was in no more employment of the management.
According to the petitioner, he was drawing Rs. 841/- per month at that time and he had been in continuous service of the management with effect from 1st August, 1984.
The petitioner served a demand notice on the management, the copy of which has been attached as Annexure P-2.
The above-mentioned facts were disclosed in the demand notice.
It was further alleged that the petitioner's services had been terminated without any charge-sheet having been served on him or any domestic enquiry having been held against him.
He was not even offered or given retrenchment benefits as envisaged under Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act.
He had prayed that his services having been terminated illegally he was intitled to reinstatement.
However, no heed was paid, by the management and after conciliation etc. failed, the matter was referred to the Government of Haryana in the Labour Department for considering the demand notice for referring the case for adjudication to the Labour Court.
Vide order dated 18-9-1986, Annexure P-3, the Deputy Secretary to Government of Haryana, Labour Department, declined to refer the matter to the Labour Court.
The order passed by the Deputy Secretary to the Government of Haryana is reproduced below :-  "You are informed in the above cited subject that the Government does not consider your case fit for referring the same to the court for adjudication because on enquiry it is observed that your services have been terminated according to the terms and conditions of the appointment letter."
Aggrieved by the said order, the petitioner filed the present writ petition.
No reply has been filed by the State of Haryana.
2.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that the respondent had no jurisdiction to enter into the merits of the dispute while passing the order dated 1891986, copy Annexure P-3.
According to the learned counsel, the State Government while exercising powers under section 10(1) of the Industrial Disputes Act performs functions which are administrative in nature and not judicial or quasi-judicial.
While the Government performs this administrative function to decide whether to make or refuse to make a reference under section 10(1), it cannot delve into the merits of the dispute and take upon itself the determination of lis.
In support of this contention, the learned counsel has relied on the judgment of the apex Court in Ram Avtar Sharma and others v. State and another, AIR 1985 SC 915, in which it has been observed as under :-  "While exercising power under Section 10(1), the function performed by the appropriate Government is an administrative function and not a juridical or quasi judicial function.
If the Government performs an administrative act while either making or refusing to make a reference under Section 10(1), it cannot delve into the merits of the dispute and take upon itself the determination of lis.
That would certainly be in excess of the power conferred by Section 10.
Section 10 requires the appropriate Government to be satisfied that an industrial dispute exists or is apprehended.
This may permit the appropriate Government to determine prima facie whether an industrial dispute exists or the claim is frivolous or bogus or put forth for extraneous and irrelevant reasons not for justice or industrial peace and harmony.
Every administrative determination must be based on ground relevant and germane to the exercise of power.
If the administrative determination is based on grounds irrelevant, extraneous or not germane to the exercise of power it is liable to be questioned in exercise of power of judicial review.
Therefore, the court may not issue writ of mandamus, directing the Government to make a reference but the Court can after examining the reasons given by the appropriate Government for refusing to make a reference come to a conclusion that they are irrelevant, extraneous or not germane to the determination and then can direct the Government to reconsider the matter."
3.
There is force in the submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
The perusal of order, copy Annexure P/3, quoted above goes to show that the State Government has delved into the merits of the case for which it had no jurisdiction.
It was for the Labour Court to decide whether termination of writ petitioner's service was in accordance with the terms of his appointment or otherwise.
4.
Consequently, this writ petition is allowed and the order dated 18-9- 1986, copy Annexure P-3, is hereby quashed.
The State Government in the Labour Department, Haryana, is directed to reconsider its decision in the light of observations made above and on consideration relevant and germane to the decision whether it is a fit case for referring the dispute to the Labour Court for adjudication.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.