RS Mongia, J - This is an appeal by the workman against the judgment of the learned Single Judge, who had accepted the writ petition of the Management i.e. the General Manager, Northern Railway, New Delhi.
2.
Briefly the facts are that the appellant-workman Shri VN Sardana was working as a Clerk (Cadre II) in the Traffic Accounts Office, Northern Railway, Jalandhar.
On 5th September, 1969, he was removed from service consequent upon a departmental enquiry held against him.
This order of removal was challenged by the workman in a civil suit, which was decreed on 29th September, 1973, holding that the order of removal had not been passed by the appointing authority.
In pursuance of the decree of the Civil Court, the workman resumed duties on 24th February, 1974.
In the first instance, the Deputy CAO(G) passed an order on 3rd September, 1974 that the workman Shri Sardana be treated on duty for all purposes and full pay and allowances for the period 5th September, 1969 to 24th February, 1974 be paid to him.
According to the Management, the above order was wrongly passed under sub-rule (3) of Rule 2044-A (Fundamental Rule 54A) and at any rate the Deputy CAO (G) was not competent to pass the order reinstating Shri V.N.
Sardaana in service and allowing him full pay and allowances for the period in question.
The Deputy CAO(G) withdrew this order by his subsequent order dated January 4, 1975.
Thereafter orders were passed by the General Manager, Northern Railway on 26th March, 1975 and 6th May, 1975, whereby payment to Shri Sardana for the period in question was ordered to be restricted to the subsistence allowance and other allowances admissible to him under rule 2043-1(ii) of the Railway Code.
3.
Shri VN Sardana then approached the Labour Court under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter called the Act), seeking full pay and allowances for the period in question.
The Labour Court vide its award (Annexure P-5) held that Shri Sardana was entitled to full pay and allowances and held him to be entitled to recover a sum of Rs. 17,30988 from the Management.
This award was challenged by the Management before the learned Single Judge by way of writ petition.
4.
The learned Single Judge held that in the present case the workman could be awarded full pay and allowances under Section 33-C(2) of the Act, as claimed by him, only if it could be said that there was an existing right to the amount claimed.
Since in the present case, according to the learned Single Judge, before the workman could be awarded full pay and allowances, it was necessary for the Labour Court to determine his right to such pay and allowances, which, in turn, would necessarily, call into question the validity of the order passed by the General Manager of the Northern Railway, allowing him only subsistence allowance for the period in question, therefore, it could not be said that there was an existing right to the amount claimed.
In this view of the matter, the learned Single Judge allowed the writ petition and quashed the award.
The workman has come up in appeal.
5.
The primary submission of the learned counsel for the appellant, Mrs. Surjit Bindra, is that the Labour Court has the Jurisdiction under Section 3-C(2) of the Act to decide incidental questions and in this case after the decree of the Civil Court declaring that the removal of the workman was illegal as the order had not been passed by a competent authority, the workman was entitled to the full pay and allowances for the said period, inasmuch as the declaration of the removal order being illegal had the effect of restoring the workman to his original position as if the order of removal had never been passed.
For this proposition the learned counsel relied upon Devendra Partap Narain Rai Sharma v. State of Uttar Pradesh and others, A.I.R. 1962 Supreme Court 1334, wherein it was held that where the order of dismissal was declared invalid in a civil suit, the effect of the decree would be that the appellant was never deemed to have been lawfully dismissed from the service and the order of reinstatment would be superfluous.
It would not, in such a contingency be open to the authority to deprive the public servant of the remuneration which he would have earned, had he been permitted to work.
For the proposition that some incidental questions can be gone into by the Labour Court under Section 33-C (2) of the Act, the learned counsel relied upon The Central Bank of India Ltd v. PS Rajagopalan etc., A.I.R. 1964 Supreme Court 743 and New Taj Mahal Cafe (Private) Ltd v. Labour Court, Hubli and another, 1970(2) L.L.J.
51.
6.
After hearing the learned counsel, we are of the view that the learned Single Judge was not correct in holding that no existing right vested in the workman to seek his claim under Section 33-C (2) of the Act.
Once the order of removal was set aside by the decree of the Civil Court the consequence of that decree was that the workman was entitled to full pay and allowances during the period he remained out of service.
The order of the General Manager, Northern Railway that the workman would only be entitled to subsistence allowance for the period in question could be ignored by the Labour Court or in any case the Labour Court could go into the validity of such an order under Section 33-C(2) of the Act.
This was purely an incidental matter for a claim under Section 33-C(2) of the Act.
7.
For the reasons recorded above, we allow this appeal and set aside the judgment of the learned Single Judge and uphold the Labour Court's award dated 29th July, 1975 (Annexure P-5) to the writ petition.
Appeal allowed.