Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner, who is at present a Major in the Army Medical Corps was tried by a General Court Martial.
He was found guilty of the charges of using force with intent to outrage the modesty of a female patient and commuting an act prejudicial to the Military discipline.
The court recommended forfeiture of 20 months service for the purpose of promotion and severe reprimand.
On revision ordered by the confirming Authority, the General Court Martial adhered to the sentence recommended by it.
The findings and sentence of the Court Martial were confirmed by the GOC-in-C on February 8, 1985.
These were duly promulgated in accordance with provisions of Army Act and Rules etc. on February 27, 1985.
The petitioner was thereafter promoted to the rank of Major.
Vide orders dated October 16, 1987, he was called upon to show cause as to why his services should not be terminated under Section 19 of the Army Act, 1950 read with Army Rule 14.
The petitioner challenges this notice (Annexure P2) through the present writ petition.
2.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it is claimed that "the administrative action of issuing show cause notice can be taken independently of court martial proceedings.
Thus there is no legal estoppel on respondent No. 2, the Chief of the Army Staff, to take administrative action against the petitioner.
In this connection the Hon'ble Supreme Court's judgment in case of Maj. Kukreti and others, is relevant (AIR 1985 SC 703).
The administrative action can be taken independently which is not hit by Article 20(2) of the Constitution of India.
It is further stated that section 121 of Army Act debars trial by subsequent court martial or action under Army Act Sections 80, 83, 84 and 85.
Section 121 of Army Act does not debar action under section 19 of the Act, once a person has been tried by the Court martial.
Thus action of respondents in proceeding against the petitioner under Army Act Section 19 Administratively not violate the provisions of Army Act Section 121."
3.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record of the case.
4.
The short point that arises for consideration in this case is as to whether or not a person, who has been tried and punished by a General Court Martial in accordance with law can still be subjected to the punishments contemplated under section 19 read with Rule 147.
5.
The relevant provisions are reproduced hereunder :-  "Section 19.
Termination of service by Central Government.
Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules and regulations made thereunder the Central Government may dismiss, or remove from the service any person subject to this Act."
"Rule 14 of the Army Rules reads as under :-  "Rule 14 - Termination of service by the Central Government on account of misconduct.
(1) When it is proposed to terminate the service of an officer under Section 19 on account of misconduct, he shall be given an opportunity to show cause in the manner specified in sub-rule (2) against such action : Provided that this sub-rule shall not apply :-  (a) where the service is terminated on the ground of conduct which has led to his conviction by a criminal court; or where the Central Government is satisfied that for reasons, to be recorded in writing, it is not expedient or reasonably practicable to give to the officer an opportunity of showing cause.
(2) When after considering the reports on an officer's misconduct, the Central Government or the Chief of the Army Staff is satisfied that the trial of the officer by a court-martial is expedient or impracticable, but is of the opinion, that the further retention of the said officer in the service is undesirable, the Chief of the Army Staff shall so inform the officer together with all reports adverse to him and he shall be called upon to submit, in writing, his explanation and defence : Provided that the Chief of the Army Staff may withhold from disclosure any such report or portion thereof if, in his opinion, its disclosure is not in the interest of the security of the State.
In the event of the explanation of the officer being considered unsatisfactory by the Chief of the Army Staff, or when so directed by the Central Government, the case shall be submitted to the Central Government, with the officer's defence and the recommendation of the Chief of the Army Staff as to the termination of the officer's service in the manner specified in sub-rule (4)  (3) Where, upon the conviction of an officer by a criminal court, the Central Government of the Chief of the Army Staff considers that the conduct of the officer which was led to his conviction renders his further retention in service undesirable, certified copy of the judgment of the criminal court convicting him shall be submitted to the Central Government with the recommendation of the Chief of the Army Staff as to the termination of the officer's service in the manner specified in sub-rule (4) (4) When submitting a case to the Central Government under the provisions of sub-rule (2) or sub-rule (3), the Chief of the Army Staff shall make his recommendation whether the officer's service should be terminated, and if so, whether the officer should be - (a) dismissed from the service; or (b) removed from the service; or (c) called upon to retire; or (d) called upon to resign.
(5) The Central Government after considering the reports and the officer's defence, if any, or the judgment of the criminal court as the case may be, and the recommendation of the Chief of the Army Staff, may, dismiss or remove the officer with or without pension or call upon him to retire or resign, and on his refusing to do so, the officer may be compulsorily retired or removed from the service on pension, or gratuity, if any, admissible to him."
Sections 71, 118, 153, 154, 158, 160 and 165 of the Army Act provide as under :-  "Section 71 : Punishment awardable by court-martial.
Punishment may be inflicted in respect of offences committed by person subject to this Act and convicted by court-martial, according to the scale following, that is to say,  (a) death; (b) (imprisonment for life); (c) imprisonment, either rigorous or simple, for any period not exceeding fourteen years; (d) cashiering, in the case of officers; (e) dismissal from the service; (f) reduction to the ranks or to a lower rank or grade or place in the list of their rank; in the case of warrant officers; and reduction to the ranks or to a lower rank or grade, in the case of non-commissioned officers, Provided that a warrant officer reduced to the ranks shall not be required to serve in the ranks as a sepoy; (g) forfeiture of seniority of rank in the case of officers, junior commissioned officers, warrant officers and non-commissioned officers; and for-feiture of all or any part of their service for the purpose of promotion, in the case of any of them whose promotion depends upon length of service; (h) forfeiture of service for the purpose of increased pay, pension or any other prescribed purpose; (i) severe reprimand or reprimand, in the case of officers, junior commissioned officers, warrant officers and non-commissioned officers; (j) forfeiture of pay and allowances for a period not exceeding three months for an offence committed on active service;  k) forfeiture in the case of a person sentenced to cashiering or dismissal from the service of all arrears of pay and allowances and other public money due to him at the time of such cashiering or dismissal; (1) stoppage of pay and allowances until any proved loss or damage occasioned by the offence of which he is convicted is made good."
"Section 118.
Power of general and summary general court-martial  A general or summary general court-martial shall have power to try any person subject to this Act for any offence punishable therein and to pass any sentence authorised thereby."
"Section 153.
Finding and sentence not valid, unless confirmed.
No finding and sentence of general, distinct or summary general, court-martial shall be valid except so far as it may be confirmed as provided by this Act."
"Section 154.
Power to confirm finding and sentence of general court-marital.
The findings and sentences of general court-martial may be confirmed by the Central Government, or by any officer empowered in this behalf by warrant of the Central Government."
"Section 158.
Power of confirming authority to mitigate, remit or commute sentences.
(1) subject to such restrictions, reservations or conditions, as may be contained in any warrant issued under section 154 or section 155 and to the provisions of sub-section (2), a confirming authority may when confirming the sentence of a court martial, mitigate or remit the punishment thereby awarded, or commute that punishment for any punishment or punishments lower in the scale laid down in section 71."
"Section 160.
Revision of finding or sentence.
(1) Any finding on sentence of a court-martial which requires confirmation may be once revised by order of the confirming authority and on such revision the court, if so directed by the confirming authority, may take additional evidence.
(2) The court, on revision, shall consist of the same officers as were present when the original decision was passed, unless any of those officers are unavoidably absent.
(3) In case of such unavoidable absence the cause thereof shall be duly certified in the proceedings, and the court shall proceed with the revision, provided that, if a general court-martial, it still consists of five officers, or, if a summary general or district court-martial, of three officers."
Section.
165.
Annulment of proceedings.
The Central Government' the Chief of the Army Staff or any prescribed officer may annul the proceedings of any court-martial on the ground that they are illegal or unjust."
6.
A perusal of Section 19 read with rule 14 shows that dismissal from service is one of the punishments which can be inflicted on a person subject to the provisions of the Army Act.
Similarly, Section 71, which enlists punishments awardable by Courts Martial, provides for dismissal from service.
It also provides for forfeiture of service etc.
Section 118 inter alia provides that a General Court Martial shall have power to try any person subject to the Army Act and to pass any sentence authorised by the Act.
Section 153 requires the findings of the Court Martial to be confirmed in accordance with the provisions of the Act.
Under section 154 the findings and sentence of General Court Martial may be confirmed by the Central Govt., or by any officer empowered in this behalf by warrant of the Central Government."
As I read this provision, the power to confirm the proceedings is vested in the Central Government.
Section 158 contemplates that the confirming Authority may mitigate or admit the punishment or commute that punishment or award a lower punishment.
7.
Even though the detailed rules have been framed laying down the procedure, it is not necessary to refer to those provisions in the present case.
8.
The admitted facts in the present case are that the petitioner was tried by a General Court Martial at Jodhpur in March, 1984.
The Court had awarded him the punishments of forfeiture of 20 months service for the purpose of promotion and severe reprimand.
Both these punishments are mentioned in Section 71 of the Act.
The proceedings of the General Court Martial were required to be confirmed under the provisions of Sections 153 and 154.
The findings were accordingly placed before the competent authority for confirmation.
In accordance with the provisions of law, the competent authority in exercise of the power conferred by Section 160 ordered the revision of the sentence recommended by the General Court Martial.
Even thereafter, the Court Martial did not lean in favour of any enhancement of the proposed punishment.
Finally, the proceedings and sentence proposed by the Court Martial were confirmed by the competent authority.
In spite of the confirmation of the proceedings, a show cause notice under Section 19 read with Rule 14 has been issued to the petitioner.
Can a person, who has been awarded once or more of the punishments as contemplated under Section 71 by a General Court Martial, be subjected to an action as contemplated under Section 19 read with Rule 14 in spite of the fact that the proceedings of the Court Martial have been duly confirmed by the competent authority ?
I think he cannot be.
9.
Under Section 154, the power to confirm the findings and sentence of General Court Martial vest in the Central Government.
Even an officer empowered in this behalf by a warrant of the Central Government acts as a delegate of the Central Government.
For all intents and purposes the order of confirmation is by the Central Government.
Once the Central Government passes an order confirming the findings and sentence awarded by the General Court Martial, and does not choose to annul the proceedings on the ground of illegality of injustice, it is precluded from proceed under Section 19 read with rule 14.
To hold otherwise, would result in an anomalous incongruity.
In my view, action under Section 19 can only be taken when the proceedings before the General Court Martial are annulled or have otherwise become time- barred.
In such a situation, when the officer has escaped punishment on account of some technicality, the power under section 19 can be invoked.
However, in a case where the proceedings of the Court Martial have been confirmed by the Central Government, no resort can be had to action under Section 19.
10.
In the given case, the General Court Martial can propose the penalty of imprisonment and dismissal from service.
While considering the matter, the Confirming Authority may under Section 158 award a lesser punishment.
If the argument of learned counsel for the respondents is accepted, the result would be that in spite of a specific order of the competent authority under Section 158 awarding a punishment lesser than that of dismissal from service, it would be open to the Central Government to proceeding under Section 19 to dismiss the officer.
Such does not appear to be the intention behind the provisions of the Act and the Rules.
It is, therefore, held that in a case where the punishment proposed by the General Court Martial is confirmed, action under Section 19 of Act and Rule 14 of the Rules is barred.
11.
There is another aspect of the matter under Section 71, dismissal is one of the punishments, which can be inflicted by a General Court Martial.
In the circumstances of a particular case the Court may come to the conclusion that it is not advisable to award the punishment of dismissal but a lesser punishment say of a severe reprimand would meet the end of justice.
This view of the Court may even be confirmed by the competent authority while considering the matter of confirmation.
If the argument of behalf of the respondents is accepted, the result would be that in spite of a conscious decision having been taken by the competent authority, which may even include the Central Government, the person concerned would still remain under the threat of dismissal from service under Section 10.
Such could not be the intention of the Legislature.
In my view, resort can be had to Section 19 only when no order of punishment has been passed in pursuance to the proceedings before the Court Martial.
12.
Mr. Ashutosh Mohanta, learned counsel for the respondents refers to the decision of the Supreme Court in Major Dharam Pal Kukreti's case (AIR 1985 SC 703) to contend that the action under Section 19 read with Rule 14 was perfectly valid.
The facts of Kukreti's case were totally different.
In that case the findings of the General Court Martial had not been confirmed.
Consequently no punishment whatsoever had been awarded.
In that context, their Lordships had taken the view that the Central Government could have resorted to Rule 14 of the Army Rules.
Such is not the situation in the present case.
13.
In view of the above findings, it is not necessary for me to go into the question of limitation raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
14.
The writ petition is accordingly allowed.
The show cause notice at Annexure P2 is set aside.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to his costs which are assessed at Rs. 3,000/-.
Petition allowed.