HS Bedi, J - Vide order dated 2nd June, 1981 the services of the petitioner were terminated allegedly without any notice, charge-sheet, enquiry or payment or any compensation to him.
The petitioner raised an Industrial Dispute imputing the order terminating his service, and the matter was referred to the Labour Court for adjudication.
The Labour Court framed the following issues :  1.
Whether the order of termination of service of the workman is justifiable at law and in order ?
2.
Whether the reference is not maintainable for the reasons mentioned in the preliminary objections of the written statement ?
3.
Relief.
Issue No. 2 was not pressed before the Labour Court and the same was accordingly decided against the Management.
However, on the question of issue No. 1, the Labour Court proceeded to enquire into the alleged misconduct of the workman.
The Labour Court found that there were two charges against the workman which required to be enquired into : (1) that the participation of the petitioner in the strike was unjustified and illegal which required his removal from service; and (2) that there were allegations of embezzlement of about Rs. 24,000/- against the petitioner which required to be proved before the Labour Court.
On the first point, the Labour Court found that the strike was illegal, but the punishment of termination of services was, too harsh.
On the second point, keeping in view the evidence of one Gurmail Singh, who appeared as MW/1, found that the petitioner had, in fact, embezzled the amount and accordingly keeping in view, the finding recorded on issue No. 1, the reference was dismissed by the Labour Court, vide its award under challenge.
2.
Mrs. Sabina, counsel for the petitioner, has argued that the charge which does not find mention in the order of termination cannot be proved before the Labour Court for the first time and for this purpose she has placed reliance on Malkhan Singh v. Union of India, 1981 Lab.
IC 1633.
In order to examine this argument, I had adjourned the case on 13th November, 1991, in order to enable the petitioner to put on record the order terminating his services, but today I am informed that the said order is not available.
The counsel for the respondents has also not been able to produce the order in question.
However, in the body of the petition, it has been specifically stated that the petitioner's services were not terminated on account of any embezzlement but solely on the ground that he had struck work and this fact has not been denied by the respondents, as no written statement has been filed till today.
It is also significant that the charge of embezzlement against the petitioner was also the subject-matter of a criminal prosecution.
and the said case has ended in acquittal of the petitioner vide judgment of the trial Court dated 781987, which has been put on the record of this case through Civil Misc. No. 7644-A of 1990.
Mrs Sabina has also argued that there was absolutely no evidence before the Labour Court to connect the petitioner with the alleged embezzlement, as only the statement of Gurmail Singh MW/1 had been recorded for the said purpose.
She has stated that the mere statement of an individual without any further documentary evidence cannot form the basis of a charge of embezzlement.
She has relied on Makhan Singh v. Narainpura Co-operative Agricultural Service Society Ltd, 1987(4) SLR 394 to this effect.
3.
After hearing the counsel for the parties, I am of the view that this petition deserves to succeed.
4.
It is worth reiterating that the criminal Court has acquitted the petitioner of the charge of embezzlement which had been framed against him.
As per the averments in the petition the charge relating to embezzlement did not form the basis of the order of termination and in view of the judgment rendered in Makhan Singh's case (supra), this matter cannot be proved for the first time before the Labour Court.
Moreover, I find that the mere statement of Gurmail Singh MW/1 cannot form the basis of proving of charge of embezzlement before the Labour Court as has been held in Makhan Singh's case (supra).
It is pertinent to mention that the aforesaid Gurmail Singh was not even examined as a prosecution witness before the Criminal Court.
5.
For the reasons recorded above, this petition succeeds and a direction is issued to the respondents to reinstate the workman-petitioner in service within a period of three months from today and also to pay all the arrears of salary and allowances due to him within the aforesaid period.
There will, however, be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.