MR Agnihotri, J - In this petition filed by DCM Limited Company, New Delhi, challenge is to the order dated 7th May, 1990, rendered by the Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Hisar, whereby applications of the workmen under Section 33-C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, has been allowed, and the management of Hisar Textile Mills has been directed to pay to the workmen a sum of Rs. 280/- each, along with simple interest at the rate of 12 per cent per annum from the date of deduction of the aforesaid amount to the date of actual payment.
2.
The main attack against the order is on the ground that it is beyond the jurisdiction of the Labour Court under Section 33-C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act to decide the rights and obligations of the parties, as it was only in the nature of an executing Court of a pre-existing and pre-determined right and that the dispute before the Labour Court involved not only the interpretation of settlements dated 4th December, 1981, and 11th August, 1982, but also adjudication of the dispute as to whether the management, after closure of the Mills and while settling full and final dues of the workmen, was entitled to reduce the dues of the workmen, which were to be paid under those settlements, in anticipation of determination of the entitlement.
3.
So far as the first contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is concerned, there is no doubt whatsoever with regard to the jurisdiction of the Labour Court to decide the matter.
The maintainability of the writ petition by invoking the jurisdiction under Section 33-C(2) ibid, has since been settled by a number of judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme Court as well as of this Court, half a dozen of them having already been mentioned in the impugned order of the learned Labour Court.
Otherwise also, it is by now axiomatic that the right of a workman to claim refund of the amount by having the deduction declare illegal is certainly a matter which the Labour Court can take cognizance of under Section 33-C(2) of the said Act.
Moreover, once it was found as a question of fact that the amount of Rs. 20/- P.M. was paid by the employer as the amount either to be adjusted or recovered in accordance with the decision of the Committee comprising of the Labour Commissioner or his representative Com.
Rachhpal Singh, and Shri NK Garg, Law Officer, the amount in question could not be deducted without there being a decision of the Committee to that effect.
If, for any reasons, it had become impossible for the Committee to render that decision, the workmen could not be made to suffer and the amount in question could not be deducted from their wages.
Obviously, the recovery was illegal and has been rightly so found by the learned Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court.
4.
Dealing with the second contention of the learned counsel, it would be enough to mention that according to the terms of settlement dated 11th August, 1982, Annexure P 3, Para 2, the nature of advance of Rs. 20/- P.M. to the workmen was only as a gesture of goodwill, and was not in the form of a loan etc.
This would be evident from the phraseology used in the sub-para of Para 2 of the aforesaid settlement, that is, "As a gesture of goodwill management has agreed to pay ad hoc advance of Rs. 20 per month from 1382 to 311082.
The advance will be distributed in four instalments in the months of August, September, November, December, 1982."
Therefore, unless there was a decision of the Committee for the recovery of this amount by making deductions from the wages of the workmen, there was no question of recovering the same.
5.
Consequently, I uphold the order dated 7th May, 1990, passed by the Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Hisar and dismiss this petition with costs, which are quantified as Rs. 1,000/-.
Petition dismissed.