MR Agnihotri, J - This judgment shall dispose of C.W.P.
No. 7611 of 1988 (The Punjab State Cooperative Land Mortgage Bank Ltd Chandigarh v. The Presiding Officer, Labour Court, UT Chandigarh and another, 1992(1) S.C.T.
154) and C.W.P.
No. 748 of 1989 (Harjit Singh v. The Punjab State Co-operative Agricultural Development Bank Limited, Chandigarh), in which common questions of fact and law are involved.
2.
Briefly stated, Harjit Singh was working as an Accountant with the Punjab State Co-operative Land Mortgage Bank Ltd Chandigarh (now renamed as the Punjab State Cooperative Agricultural Development Bank Ltd, Chandigarh), hereinafter referred to as "the Bank".
On 8th March, 1973, on the basis of a complaint against him, a criminal case under Sections 409/120-B, Indian Penal Code, was registered against Harjit Singh and he was placed under suspension on 8th May, 1974.
After trial, Harjit Singh was acquitted by the Judicial Magistrate 1st Class, Patiala, on 15th July, 1985, and he was reinstated in service on 9th November, 1985.
Thereafter, he filed an application before the Labour Court, Union Territory, Chandigarh, under Section 33-C (2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, for the recovery of arrears of his salary from 8th May, 1974 to 5th November, 1985, minus the subsistence allowance already drawn by him.
The application was contested by the Management - Bank mainly on the grounds that firstly it was not maintainable under Section 33-C (2) of the Act and secondly, departmental inquiry was pending against Harjit Singh.
3.
The learned Labour Court, after thorough consideration of the record and appraisal of the evidence, came to the conclusion that the claim of Harjit Singh was well-founded as the Management-Bank had not paid an wages to Harjit Singh during the aforesaid period from 1974 to 1985 and he was entitled to the same, of course, after deducting the subsistence allowance paid to him during this period.
The mere fact that the departmental inquiry had not been completed during the last two years and no explanation was forthcoming for not completing the inquiry, Harjit Singh could not be made to suffer for the same.
This order was passed by the Labour Court, thus granting the application on 26th November, 1987, by issuing a direction to the Management - Bank to complete the inquiry within two months and to release the amount to Harjit Singh to which he was found entitled under law.
4.
Challenging the order of the Labour Court before me, it has been vehemently contended by Mr. HS Mattewal, learned Advocate General, Punjab, that firstly respondent Harjit Singh, Accountant, was not the workman within the meaning of section 2(a) of the Industrial Disputes Act, and, therefore, he was not entitled to invoke the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act, and as a necessary corollary the order of the Labour Court deserved to be set aside on that ground.
Further, since the matter has not been finalised at the level of the departmental authorities as yet, it was too early for the Labour Court to issue directions regarding the payment of arrears of back wages.
5.
With respect, none of the contentions of the learned Advocate General is tenable, inasmuch as it has been settled by Hon'ble the Supreme Court and this Court in a number of judgments that the claim of a workman with regard to back wages etc. and the recovery of the amount deducted from the wages can certainly be the subject-matter of adjudication under Section 33-C of the Industrial Disputes Act.
6.
So far as the contention regarding respondent Harjit Singh being workman or not is concerned, neither any plea was taken by the Management - Bank before the Labour Court nor was any evidence with regard to the nature of duties and responsibilities etc. of the workman led by the Bank before it.
In the circumstances, it is neither legally permissible nor proper at this stage to examine the question and give a finding as to whether Harjit Singh was covered within the definition of workman (Section 2(S) of the Industrial Disputes Act.)
7.
As regards the contention of the petitioner with regard to the pendency of the departmental inquiry is concerned, the workman is not concerned with the same, inasmuch as the mere fact that the inquiry has been kept pending by the Management for the last many years is no ground to deny to him the back wages to which he is otherwise entitled in law.
It was for the Management to have the inquiry expedited and if it is still pending even though the workman was acquitted about six years ago, the Management - Bank can certainly have the same expedited.
8.
Accordingly, C.W.P.
No. 7611 of 1988 is dismissed with no order as to costs.
Adverting to C.W.P.
No. 748 of 1989 filed by Harjit Singh workman, that is only in the nature of a cross-petition, seeking mandamus against the respondent Bank for considering his case for promotion to the rank of Inspecting Officer/Area Manager with effect from the date his juniors were promoted vide order dated 21st January, 1981, and for the grant of consequential monetary benefits.
9.
All these claims of petitioner Harjit Singh shall have to be considered by the Management - Bank in accordance with law now, as the writ petition of the Management-Bank against the order of the Labour Court has been dismissed.
In this regard, the preliminary objection number 3 taken by the respondent-Bank in their written statement is relevant and is reproduced hereunder :-  "That the relief sought by the petitioner in this writ petition is the subject-matter of C.W.P.
No. 7611 of 1988 filed by the respondent-Bank against the order of the Labour Court, UT Chandigarh which stands admitted and execution of the order of Labour Court has been stayed by this Hon'ble Court (Annexures R-9 and R-10); as such this petition may be heard along with C.W.P.
No. 7611 of 1988".
10.
Consequently, C.W.P.
No. 748 of 1989 is allowed and the respondent- Bank is directed to consider the claim of the petitioner, for the grant of further promotion to the higher rank and consequential benefits on the basis of his seniority position and record of service, with effect from the date his juniors were promoted.
Since the matter has already been sufficiently delayed, the process shall be finalised within a period of three months.
However, there is no order as to costs.
Orders accordingly.