GC Garg, J - The petitioner having failed in getting admission to the MD Gynae in the Medical College, Rohtak, on the basis of her merit, sought assistance of the Court by filing a suit.
2.
The petitioner belongs to Scheduled Caste category for which admittedly there is no provision for reservation in the Prospectus issued by the Medical College, Rohtak for admission to the MD/MS Courses.
The allegations made in the suit were that she was entitled to be admitted in MD Gynae Course in view of the instructions issued by the Government of Haryana providing for reservation for Scheduled Castes and on the basis of her merit, against one of the seats meant for that category.
The suit was contested.
It was pleaded that no reservation had been provided in the Prospectus by the University for admission to the M.D./M.S.
Courses and, therefore, the petitioner was not entitled to be admitted except on the basis of her merit drawn in terms of the Prospectus.
It was also stated that there was no reservation for Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes in Post Graduate Courses as per the policy of the Government conveyed to it by letter dated 111991.
3.
An application under Order 39 Rules 1 and 2 read with Section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure was filed along with the suit for the grant of ad interim injunction.
The trial Court by order dated 29th January, 1991 directed the defendant/respondent to admit the petitioner in MD Gynae Course in the Medical College, Rohtak, provisionally.
The interim order passed was later on confirmed by order dated 431991.
The University feeling aggrieved against the order of the trial Court preferred an appeal which was finally disposed of by the learned District Judge, Rohtak.
The learned District Judge overruled the objection of the plaintiff that the appeal filed before him was incompetent.
on merits, the appeal was accepted and the order passed by the trial Court on application under Order 39 Rules 1 and 2 read with Section 151 CPC was set aside.
The application was consequently dismissed.
Hence the plaintiff preferred the present revision petition.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner fairly and rightly at the outset conceded that the petitioner had no case on merits.
Admittedly, neither reservation for the Post Graduate Courses has been provided by the State Government for the year 1991 nor any such reservation in these Courses has been provided by the University at the time of issuing the Prospectus.
In my view, reservation is an enabling provision and any person belonging to a particular caste cannot claim it as a matter of right that there should be reservation and consequently admitted to the said Course on that basis.
It is for the authorities to provide reservation depending upon the facts and circumstances of each case.
Since the authorities decided not to provide any reservation in the M.D./M.S.
Courses, the petitioner in my view, has no case for seeking admission to the said Course on the ground that she belonged to a reserved category.
5.
Learned counsel further argued that the trial Court granted the ad interim injunction directing the defendants to admit the petitioner in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction under Section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure and not under Order 39 Rules 1 and 2 and thus submitted that no appeal lay to the District Judge against the order of the trial Court.
Such a contention was also raised before the learned District Judge but was negatived According to the learned counsel, the order passed by the trial Court in this case was a simpliciter order directing the respondents to admit the petitioner to the M.D.
Course and such an order could not be passed under Order 39 Rules 1 and 2 and could only be passed under Section 151 CPC According to the learned counsel, Order 39 Rule 1 would apply only to cases where there was danger to any property being wasted, damaged or alienated or wrongfully sold in execution of a decree or the defendant threatened or intended to remove or dispose of his property with a view to defraud his creditors or some injury was sought to be caused to the plaintiff relating to the property in suit,.
the Court gets jurisdiction to grant temporary injunction by making such order or the preservation of the property.
In the present case there was no such danger to any property involved in the suit nor was there going to be committed a breach of any contract and thus the provisions of Order 39 were not at all applicable.
It is, however, not necessary to further dwell on the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner in facts of this case.
I have gone through the order of the trial Court in order to ascertain its intention of the trial Court whether the same was passed under the provisions of Order 39 Rules 1 and 2 CPC or it was an order under Section 151 CPC.
A reading of the order clearly leads one to the conclusion that the same was passed under the provisions of Order 39 Rules 1 and 2 and not under Section 151 CPC The learned trial Court noticed the three principles for grant of ad interim injunction; namely, (i) prima facie case; (ii) the balance of convenience; and (iii) on refusal to grant injunction, the plaintiff will suffer irreparable loss and injury, and after noticing these principles, the order of ad interim injunction was confirmed.
It can thus be concluded that the trial Court was conscious that the order was being passed in exercise of its power under Order 39 Rules 1 and 2 and not under Section 151 CPC The application which was being disposed of was also an application under Order 39 Rules 1 and 2 praying for grant of ad interim temporary injunction.
Thus, in my view, the appeal was clearly maintainable under Order 43 Rule 1(r) of the C.P.C. and the learned District Judge has rightly overruled the objection that the appeal was not maintainable.
6.
It is true that if an order is passed by the Court in exercise of its power under Section 151 CPC, then no appeal is competent before the District Judge, but as noticed above, the order passed by the trial Court in this case was not one under Section 151 of the Code.
Mere mention in the application of Section 151 CPC cannot lead one to the conclusion that the order was passed under the said Section and not under Order 39 Rules 1 and 2 CPC  For the foregoing reasons, I see no merit in the revision and the same is dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.