GR Majithia, J - This judgment disposes of C.W.P.
No. 7987 of 1990 and the connected Writ Petition Nos. 2462 of 1987, 918, 919, 3841, 4099, 4398, 4689, 5210, 5020, 5488, 5559, 6562, 6570, 6823, 7241, 7954, 7780, 9355 of 1988, 441 of 1989, 1804, 2590, 2863, 2907, 3650, 8198, 10387 and 14573 of 1990.
In all these writ petitions, the principal challenge is to the validity of the order issued by the Chandigarh Administration on January 30, 1989.
2.
Reference to relevant facts, for resolving the dispute, has been made from the pleadings in CWP No. 7987 of 1990.
3.
In exercise of the power conferred by Rule 45 of the Fundamental Rules, the Chandigarh Administration framed rules called the Government Residences (Chandigarh Administration Common Pool) Allotment Rules, 1972 (for short the Rules).
These rules provide for allotment of residences from the general pool accommodation to government servants.
Chandigarh Administration issued order dated April 3, 1974 saying that when a Government servant who has been allotted government accommodation from the general pool retires from service his/her son, daughter, wife, husband or father be allotted accommodation from the general pool on an ad hoc basis provided the said relation is a government servant eligible for general pool accommodation and had been sharing accommodation with the retiring officer at least for six months before the date of retirement.
The same residence was to be regularised in the name of the relation if he/she is eligible for a residence of that type or a higher type.
In other cases, the said relation will be allotted a residence of his/her entitled type, if available at the time, or failing that a type next below, if acceptable to the allottee.
Vide No. 3713-IH(3)87/10497 dated June 10, 1987, it was decided that the existing policy of the Chandigarh Administration whereby son, daughter or dependent of a retired government servant was entitled to out of turn allotment accommodation from the general pool was unfair.
On January 30, 1989 in supersession of Chandigarh Administration, Finance Department Order dated April 3, 1974, issued vide Endorsement No. 2920-UTFIL(9)-74/5970-72 dated the 15th April, 1974 and subsequent instructions issued with Chandigarh Administration's letter No. 3713-IH(3)-87/10497-500, dated 10th June, 1987 and further modified vide letter No. 6484-IH(3)-87/17592, dated the 28th September, 1987, a fresh policy decision was taken by the Chandigarh Administration reading thus :-  "The Administrator, UT, Chandigarh is pleased to decide that when a Govt. servant, who is an allottee of General Pool accommodation, retires from service, his/her son, unmarried daughter or wife or husband, as the case may be, may be allotted accommodation from the General Pool on out of turn basis, provided that said relation is a Government servant eligible for allotment of accommodation from the General Pool and had been continuously residing with the retiring Govt. servant, after joining Govt. service, for at least three years immediately preceding the date of his/her retirement.
In case, however, a person is appointed to Govt. service within a period of three years preceding the date of retirement, or had been transferred to the place of posting of the retiring Government servant any time within the preceding three years, the date on which he was so appointed or transferred would be the date applicable for the purpose.
This decision would cover cases of Government servants retiring on or after 28.2.1989."
2.
In the case of those Government servants, who retire/retired before 28.2.1989 and after 9th June, 1987, the concession of making out of turn allotment to an eligible dependent i.e. his/her son/daughter/daughter-in-law or wife or husband, as the case may be, would be considered on fulfilment of the old conditions i.e. the dependent was residing continuously for a period of six months with the retired Government servant immediately prior to his retirement.
The old cases of daughters-in-law already settled will, however, not be reopened.
This concession would also be extended on request to eligible dependents who vacated the Govt. accommodation after 1061987.
In all such cases, the Govt. servants will be required to pay licence fee at market rate for the period of unauthorised occupation of the Govt. accommodation.
3.
The concession now becoming available to dependents of Govt. servants retiring on or after 28.2.89 will, however, not be available in cases where the retiring employee or any member of his family owns a house at Chandigarh or in any of the neighbouring urban estates of SAS Nagar (Mohali) and Panchkula.
4.
The eligible dependent will be allotted accommodation one type below his/her entitlement, provided that in no case, except otherwise specified, allotment will be made of a type of house higher than in the occupation of the retiring Govt. servant.
5.
The clearance of all dues outstanding in respect of the premises in occupation of the retired Government servant shall be an essential condition for the consideration of allotment to an eligible dependent."
4.
The validity of this decision has been challenged in the writ petition.
Out of turn allotment from the general pool accommodation to the relation of a retired government employee was permitted if the said relation satisfied the following conditions, namely, i) if he/she is a government servant eligible for allotment of accommodation from the general pool, ii) had been continuously residing with the retired government servant after joining government service for at least three years preceding the date of retirement of the government servant, iii) in case he/she is appointed to government service within a period of three years preceding the date of retirement or had been transferred to the place of posting of the retiring government servant any time within preceding three years, iv) the government servant must have retired on or after February 28, 1989; v) if a government employee retires before February 28, 1982 and after June 1987, he/she must be residing with him/her continuously for six months.
This concession was, however, not available in the case where the retiring employee or any member of his/her family owns a house at Chandigarh or in any of the neighbouring estates of government employees into two categories, namely, those who retired after June 9, 1987 but before February 28, 1989; their relations would be entitled to out of turn allotment if they had been residing with the Government servants continuously for a period of six months from the date of retirement, in other cases, where the government employee retires on or after February 28, 1989 his/her relation will be entitled to out of turn allotment if they fall within the specific category and had been residing with the government employee continuously for a period of three years prior to the date of retirement.
I sent for the departmental file to find out on what basis the two sets of government employees retiring on or after February, 28, 1989 and before February 28, 1989 and after June 9, 1987 have been put into two categories.
Notice was issued to the Home Secretary, Chandigarh Administration to appear in person but he did not appear and instead deputed Secretary, House Alotment Committee to appear before this court in response to the notice and that officer did not produce any record.
He could not state on what basis the retiring government servants were compartmentalised.
The respondent could not produce any data before this Court on the basis of which the retiring government servants were placed in two different categorises.
The purpose of making out of turn allotment to the relation of a retiring government employee is to enable the latter to continue to reside in the official accommodation in his possession even after retirement.
In other words not to make the retiring government employee shelterless.
In the order dated April 3, 1974 the residential accommodation allotted to a retired government employee was to be regularised in the name of the relation of the retiring government employee provided the relation in whose name the accommodation was to be allotted has been residing continuously for a period of six months with the retiring government employee.
The policy to allot out of turn residential government accommodation to the relation of the retiring government servant was in existence till 1987 when a decision was taken to rescind the existing policy decision.
This action of the Chandigarh Administration was challenged in this Court in a number of writ petitions.
Thereafter the, impugned policy decision was taken.
The object of the policy decision is to benefit the retiring government employees.
There appears to be no rationale or justification for laying down that in case of a government employee who retired before February 28, 1989 and after June 9, 1987, his/her eligible dependent as the case may be should have been continuously residing with the Government employee for a period of six months prior to his/her retirement and in the case of government employee who retired on or after February 28, 1989, his/her dependent relation who is otherwise eligible for allotment of accommodation must have been residing with him/her after having been appointed in service for a period of three years preceding the date of retirement.
The chosen dates of application of the policy decision has no nexus with the object sought to be achieved.
The categorisation of the retiring government employees those who retired on or after February 28, 1989 and those who retired before that date is wholly artificial and arbitrary.
There is no logic or justification for classifying the retiring government employees into two different categories.
In DB Wakara v Union of India, AIR 1983 SC 130 the pensioners for the purpose of computation of pension were placed into two categories and the dispute arose as under :-  "On May 25, 1979, Government of India, Ministry of Finance, issued Office Memorandum No. F-19(3)-HV-79 whereby the formula for computation of pension was liberalised but made it applicable to Government servants who were in service on March 31, 1979 and retired from service on or after that date.
The formula introduced a slab system for computation of pension.
This liberalised pension formula was applicable to employees governed by the 1972 Rules retiring on or after the specified date.
The pension for the service personnel which will include Army, Navy and Air Force staff is governed by the relevant regulations.
By memorandum dated September 28, 1979, the liberalised pension formula introduced for the government servant governed by the 1972 rules was extended to the Armed Forces personnel subject to limitations set out in the memorandum with a condition that the new Rules of pension would be effective from April 1, 1979, and may be applicable to all service officers who become/became non-effective on or after that date.
The liberalised pension formula was made applicable prospectively to those who retired on or after March 31, 1979 in case of Government servants covered by 1972 rules and in respect of defence personnel those who became/become non-effective on or after April 1, 1979.
Consequently those who retired prior to the specified date would not be entitled to the benefits of the liberalised pension formula.
This classification was challenged on the ground that it was violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
The contention raised was "The basic contention as hereinbefore noticed is that the pensioners for the purpose of receiving pension from a class and there is no criterion on which classification of pensioners retiring prior to specified date and retiring sub sequent to that date can provide a rational principal co-related to the object viz. object underlying payment of pension," and it was answered thus :- "If it appears to be undisputable, as it does to us that the pensioners for the purpose of pension benefits form a class, would its upward revision permit a homogeneous class to be divided by arbitrarily fixing an eligibility criteria unrelated to purpose of revision, and would such classification be founded on some rational principle ?
The classification has to be based as is well settled on some rational principle and the rational principle must have nexus to the objects sought to be achieved.
We have set out the objects underlying the payment of pension.
If the State considered it necessary to liberalise the pension scheme, we find no rational principle behind it for granting these benefits only to those who retired subsequent to that date simultaneously denying the same to those who retired prior to that date.
If the liberalisation was considered necessary for augmenting social security in old age to government servants then those who retired earlier cannot be worse off than those who retire later.
Therefore, this division which classify pensioners into two classes is not based on any rational principle and if the rational principle is the one of dividing pensioners with a view to giving something more to persons otherwise equally placed, it would be discriminatory.
To illustrate, take two persons, one retired just a day prior and another a day just succeeding the specified date.
Both were in the same pay bracket, the average emolument was the same and both had put in equal number of years of service.
How does a fortuitous circumstance of retiring a day earlier or a day later will permit totally unequal treatment in the matter of pension ?
One retiring a day earlier will have to be subject to ceiling of Rs. 8100/- pa and average emoluments to be worked out on 36 months' salary when the other will have a ceiling of Rs. 12,000/- pa and average emoluments will be computed on the basis of last ten months' average.
The artificial division stares into face and is unrelated to any principle and whatever principle, if there be any, has absolutely no nexus to the objects sought to be achieved by liberalising the pension scheme.
In fact, this arbitrary division has not only no nexus to the liberalised pension scheme but it is counter-productive and runs counter to the whole gamut of pension scheme.
The equal treatment guaranteed in Article 14 is wholly violated inasmuch as the pension rules being statutory in character since the specified date, the rules accord differential and discriminatory treatment to equals in the matter of commutation of pension.
A forty-eight hour difference in matter of retirement would have a traumatic effect.
Division is thus both arbitrary and unprincipled, Therefore, the classification does not stand the test of Article 14.
Further the classification is wholly arbitrary because we do not find a single acceptable or persuasive reason for this division.
This arbitrary action violated the guarantee of Article 14."
5.
The principle underlying the guarantee of Article 14 of the Constitution of India is that all persons similarly situated shall be treated alike both in privileges conferred and liabilities imposed.
Equal laws would have to be applied to all in the same situation, and there should be no discrimination between one person and another if as regards the subject-matter of the legislation their position is substantially the same.
In the earliest stages of evaluation of constitutional law, Article 14 came to be identified with the doctrine of 'classification' because the view taken was that Article 14 forbids discrimination and there will be no discrimination where classification making the differentia fulfils two conditions viz, (i) that the classification is founded on an intelligible differentia which distinguishes persons or things that are grouped together from those that are left out of the group, and (ii) that differentia has a rational relation to the objects sought to be achieved by the statute in question.
A new dimension was given to Article 14 by the apex Court in CP Royappa v. State of Tamil Nadu, reported as AIR 1974 SC 555.
In that case an IAS officer challenged the order of his transfer on several grounds including the violation of Article 14.
It was pointed out for the first time that Article 14 embodies guarantee against arbitrariness.
Their Lordships observed thus :-  "From a positive point of view, equality is antithetic to arbitrariness.
In fact, equality and arbitrariness are sworn enemies; one belongs to the rule of law in a republic while the other, to the whim and caprice of absolute monarch.
Where an act is arbitrary it is implicit in it that it is unequal both according to political logic and constitutional law and is, therefore, violative of Article 14 and if it reflects any matter resulting to public employment, it is also violative of Article 16.
Articles 14 and 16 strike at arbitrariness in State action and ensure fairness and equality of treatment."
The legislation has not only to pass the above test but it must also pass the test that it is not arbitrary.
In Smt. Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India, AIR 1978 SC 507, their Lordship of the Supreme Court were pleased to observe as under :-  ....... what is the content and reach of the great equalising principle enunciated in this Article ?
There can be no doubt that it is a founding faith of the Constitution.
It is indeed the pillar on which rests squarely the foundation of our democratic republic.
And, therefore, it must not be subjected to a narrow, pedantic or lexicographic approach.
No attempt should be made to truncate its all-embracing scope and meaning for, to do so would be to violate its activist magnitude.
Equality is a dynamic concept with many aspects and dimensions and it cannot be imprisoned within traditional and doctrinaire limits ......
Article 14 strikes at arbitrariness in State action and ensures fairness and equality of treatment.
The principle of reasonableness which legally as well as philosophically, is an essential element of equality or non-arbitrariness pervades Art. 14 like a brooding omnipresence.
6.
In Special Courts Bill case, AIR (???)
197 SC 478, their Lordships of the Supreme Court stated the following four principles in these terms :-  "The constitutional command to the State to afford equal protection to its citizens a goal not attainable by the invention and application of a precise formula.
Therefore, classification need not be constituted by an exact or scientific exclusion or inclusion or persons or things.
The Courts should not insist on demanding exactness or apply doctrinaire tests for determining the validity of classification in any given case.
Classification is justified if it is not palpably arbitrary.
The principle underlying the guarantee of Article 14 is not that the same rules of law should be applicable to all persons within the Indian territory or that the same medies should be made available to them irrespective of differences of circumstances, it only means that all persons similarly circumstanced shall be treated alike both in privileges conferred and liabilities imposed.
Equal laws would have to be applied for all in the same situation, and there should be no discrimination between one person and another if as regards subject-matter of the legislation their position is substantially the same.
The law can make and set again them according to the heads and exigencies of the society and as suggested by experiences.
It can of evil, and the justification should never be arbitrary, artificial or exists.
The classification has to be arbitrary but must be rational, that is to say, if suit not may be based on same qualities or characteristics which are to be found in all the persons grouped together and not in others who are left out but these qualities or characteristics must have a reasonable relation to the object of the legislation.
In order to pass the test, two conditions must be fulfilled.
Namely, (1) that the classification must be founded on an intelligible differentia which distinguishes those that are grouped together from others, and (2) that differentia must have rational relation to the object sought to be achieved by the Act."
7.
In Ramana Dayaram Shetty v. International Airport Authority of India, AIR 1979 SC 1628 the apex Court observed that discriminatory action of the Government is liable to be struck down, unless it can be shown by the Government that the departure was not arbitrary, but was based on some valid principle which in itself was not irrational, unreasonable or discriminatory.
This proposition was affirmed by the Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court in Ajay Hasia v. Khalid Mujib Sehravardi reported as AIR 1981 SC 487.
8.
The classification of retiring government employees viz those retiring on or before February 28, 1989 and before June 9, 1987 is wholly arbitrary.
The condition of the policy decision maintained in para No. 3 of the policy reproduced supra is unintelligible.
There is no in saying that the concession of cut of turn allotment of accommodation from the general pool would not be available to the eligible dependents of government servants retiring on or after February 28, 1989 where the retiring government employee or any member of his family owns a house at Chandigarh or in the neighbouring urban estates of SAS Nagar (Mohali) and Panchkula.
A family member of a retiring government servant may be having a house in Chandigarh or in the urban estates of Panchkula or Mohali he may not permit his relation, the retiring government employee, eligible dependent of retiring government employee to live with him in this house.
A family member of a government servant who owns a house in Chandigarh or in the urban estates of Panchkula or Mohali, but the government employee has retired from service before February 28, 1989, the embargo put in this clause will not be applicable to that government employee.
To say the least this condition imposed in the order is not only unfair but wholly arbitrary.
The entire policy decision smacks of arbitrariness and cannot be sustained.
9.
For the reasons aforesaid, the writ petition succeed the policy decision dated January 30, 1989 is quashed being arbitrary and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
Before I part with this judgment, I am constrained to observe that by my order May 21, 1989, directed as under :-  In this bench of cases, the validity of the order contained to letter No. 3713-IH(3) 10947 dated June 10, 1987 and office order dated January 30, 1969 contained in Endst.
No. 1268-III(8)-89/300) dated February 13, 1989 have been challenged and in majority of cases no written statement has filed.
The record containing Government Residence (Chandigarh Administration Pool) Allotment Rules, 1972 and subsequent instructions on the subject issued from time to time has not been produced.
In order to do justice to the parties, it is necessary that the Rules and the instructions issued from time to time should be made available to this Court.
I accordingly direct the Home Secretary, Chandigarh Administration to appear in person on May 22, 1991 at 1030 am with the relevant record mentioned above.
The Registrar (Judicial) is directed to send a copy of this order through special messenger to the Home Secretary, Chandigarh Administration, Union Territory, Chandigarh today even if it is to be served at his residence.
The Home Secretary will ensure compliance of this order."
The order was communicated to the Home Secretary, Chandigarh Administration through SC No. 23258 dated May 21, 1991 by Registrar (Judicial) of this Court but he did not choose to appear and deputed Chairman of the House Allotment Committee to appear before me.
He was not entitled to the courtesy shown to him.
To say the least, his conduct is undesirable and unbecoming of a highly placed public servant.
I do not think it advisable to initiate contempt proceedings against him but I do hope that there will be no recurrence of the lapse as has occurred in the instant case.
I leave the matter at this.
Order accordingly.