Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner was tried by a General Court Martial.
He was awarded the punishment of reduction in rank and detention for three months.
The Confirming Authority ordered his dismissal from Service.
The petitioner submits that the Confirming Authority could not have awarded the severe punishment of dismissal from service.
The respondents claim that the punishment of dismissal is lesser than that of reduction in rank and detention for three months.
Is it so ?
2.
A few facts may be noticed.
The petitioner was enrolled in the trade of clerks (General Duties) in the Indian Air Force on February 18, 1965.
He was posted as leading Aircraftsman on February 1, 1968.
The petitioner was promoted to the rank of Corporal on February 18, 1970 and that of Sergeant on August 1, 1980.
The petitioner was promoted to the rank of Junior Warrant Officer on April 1, 1985.
During the period of more than 20 years of service, the petitioner had a totally blotless record till July, 1985.
The petitioner avers that on account of family circumstances, he suffered some mental sickness as a result of which he remained absent from duty for different intervals of time.
He was tried by General Court Martial on August 21, 1986 for eight charges of absence from duty.
The petitioner pleaded guilty.
General Court Martial awarded the following sentences :  (a) to be reduced to the ranks; and (b) to undergo detention for three months.
The finding and sentence awarded by the General Court Martial were to be confirmed by the A.O.C.-in-C, WAC, IAF.
The Confirming Authority converted the punishment of detention for three months to dismissal from service.
This order was conveyed to the petitioner on August 30, 1986.
Accordingly, the petitioner was dismissed from service.
A copy of the order of punishment is at Annexure P2.
The petitioner filed an appeal before the Chief of Air Staff on September 22, 1986.
A copy of the appeal filed by the petitioner is at Annexure P-3.
This was rejected vide orders dated February 13, 1987.
(Annexure P-4).
Aggrieved by the order of punishment and the dismissal of appeal, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
3.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
A preliminary objection has been raised regarding the maintainability of the petition filed in this Court.
It has been averred that the petitioner had to approach the Central Administrative Tribunal and the writ petition was not competent.
On merits, it has been, inter alia, averred as under :-  "The Confirming Authority has no power to enhance the punishment awarded by Court Martial and Court Martial and the Confirming Authority has not enhanced it.
The punishment of detention has been considered severe by the Legislature probably on the ground that it deprives a person of his liberty as he would be kept in the cell for the period of detention, which is not the case in dismissal from the service."
4.
The petitioner has filed a replication.
In reply to the preliminary objection, it has been stated that the members of the Defence Services cannot approach the Administrative Tribunal.
On merits, it has been averred that the punishment of dismissal is severer than that of detention as "dismissal results in forfeiture of all the consequential benefits whereas the detention does not result in such harsh measures".
"After detention of three months the petitioner should have been granted next higher rank of corporal after six months and thereafter every six months next higher rank and remained in service upto the age of 55 years ie the date of retirement and could have earned the pensionary benefits and only three months period of detention would have been considered as non-qualifying service."
5.
Mr. BS Sehgal, learned counsel for the petitioner stated at the outset that he did not challenge the punishment as originally proposed by the General Court Martial.
His only challenge was to the punishment of dismissal imposed by the Confirming Authority.
The contention raised by the learned counsel is that the punishment of dismissal is severer than the one proposed by the General Court Martial.
This punishment, the learned counsel contends, could not have been imposed by the Confirming Authority.
6.
Section 157 of the Air Force Act enumerates the powers of Confirming Authority.
It reads as under :-  "Section 157  POWER OF CONFIRMING AUTHORITY TO MITIGATE, REMIT OR COMMUTE SENTENCES :-  1) Subject to such restrictions, reservations or conditions as may be contained in any warrant issued under section 153 or section 154 and to the provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3), a confirming authority may, when cofirmiing the sentence of a court martial, mitigate or remit the punishment thereby awarded, or commute that punishment for any punishment or punishments lower in the scale laid down in section 73.
2) A sentence of transportation shall not be commuted for a sentence of imprisonment or detention for a term exceeding the term of transportation awarded by the Court.
3) A sentence of imprisonment shall not be commuted for a sentence of detention for a term exceeding the term of imprisonment awarded by the Court."
A perusal of the above provision shows that the Confirming Authority can "mitigate or remit the punishment" "or commute" a "punishment for any punishment or punishments lower in the scale laid down in section 73".
In the present case, the, Confirming Authority has converted the punishment awarded by the General Court Martial to that of dismissal.
As a result of this punishment, the petitioner who is stated to be about 40 years of age, was deprived of the right to continue in service till the age of superannuation viz. 55 years.
Furthermore, he was also deprived of the right to get pension etc.
In the circumstances of the case, it is apparent that the punishment of dismissal has not only resulted in his immediate unemployment but also deprivation of the retirement benefits which had already become due to him on completion of 15 years service.
As against this the punishment as originally awarded by the General Court Martial would have only resulted in forfeiture of service for the period of detention viz. 3 months.
The petitioner would have, thereafter, continued in service and even earned his future promotions, etc, At the end of the tenure, he would have been entitled to all service benefits.
7.
In the written statement it has been averred that the punishment of dismissal from service appears lesser than that of detention and is consequently lower in scale.
A perusal of section 73 no doubt shows that the imprisonment can be for a term not exceeding 14 years and detention for term not exceeding 2 years in the case of airmen.
In other cases, even detention can be for a higher term.
In that contest, it may be possible to hold that imprisonment or detention when awarded for a longer term, dismissal may be a lesser punishment.
However, in the context of the facts of the present case, it appears difficult to hold that the punishment of dismissal was lower than that of reduction in rank and detention for 3 months.
In a poor country where it is difficult to get a job, the need for two square meals a day is the primary concern of every citizen.
Dismissal would not only deprive the petitioner of the job but also of all retirement benefits.
He thus, appears to be right in his contention that the punishment awarded by the Confirming Authority is severer than that awarded by the General Court Martial.
8.
Section 157 of the Air Force Act does not authorise the Confirming Authority to award punishment higher than that awarded by the General Court Martial.
The action of the respondents in the present case was certainly beyond the provisions of section 157.
9.
Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed.
The orders at Annexures P-2 and P-4 are quashed.
The authorities would re-examine the case of the petitioner and consider the question of confirming/commuting the sentence awarded by the General Court Martial.
The petitioner shall be deemed to have continued in service in the rank to which he had been reduced and shall also be entitled to all consequential benefits like arrears of salary etc.
In the circumstances of the case, the parities are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.