VK Jhanji, J - The plaintiff at the relevant time was working as S.D.O.
(Irrigation Branch) in Government of Haryana.
When he was posted at Fatehabad, he released payment of Rs. 34,500/- to one kiln contractor without obtaining the written approval of the Executive Engineer.
Finding this the State of Haryana served a charge-sheet on the plaintiff along with the statement of allegations and he was called upon to give explanation against the proposed action to be taken under Rule 7 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1952 (hereinafter referred to as the Rules).
The plaintiff, on receipt of the charge-sheet, submitted his reply.
After consideration of the reply, the Government decided to inflict a minor punishment as provided under Rule 8 of the Rules and directed that recovery of Rs. 16,000/- be made from the salary of the plaintiff.
The plaintiff has challenged the said order of the Government by filing a suit.
Alongwith the suit he also filed an application under Order 39 Rules 1 and 2 read with Section 151 of Civil Procedure Code for grant of ad interim injunction.
The trial Court granted ad interim injunction in favour of the plaintiff and restrained the defendants to recover a sum of Rs. 16,000/- during the pendency of the suit.
Being aggrieved of the order of the trial Court, the defendants filed appeal before the first appellate Court and the first appellate Court allowed the appeal and set aside the order of the trial Court.
The plaintiff has come to this Court by way of present revision petition.
2.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the first appellate Court was no justified in vacating the order of ad interim injunction passed by the trial Court in favour of the plaintiff.
His precise submission is that once the Government decided to proceed against the plaintiff under Rule 7 of the Rules i.e. to impose major punishment, then the entire procedure as provided under Rule 7 was to be exhausted and even if minor punishment was to be imposed, even then procedure laid down under Rule 7 of the Rules has to be followed.
3.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the defendants has supported the order of the first appellate Court on the ground that once the first appellate Court has exercised its discretion, the same should not be interfered with by this Court in revisional jurisdiction.
4.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, I find that the first appellate Court acted illegally in exercise of its jurisdiction in setting aside the order of the trial Court and it certainly calls for interference by this Court.
The first appellate Court while setting aside the judgment of the trial Court relied upon the judgment of Supreme Court in Shadi Lal Gupta v. State of Punjab, 1973(1) S.L.R.
913.
In that judgment, it has been held that -  "Rule 8 does not require anything more than that the allegations on the basis of which the officer concerned is charged should be made known to him and he should be given an opportunity to make any representation with regard to them.
He need not be told the punishment which is sought to be imposed on him, either at the time the charge-sheet is served on him or at any other stage.
There is no question of his being given an opportunity a second time after the enquiry is completed in respect of the punishment sought to be imposed on him unlike in a case covered by Rule 7."
5.
There is no quarrel with this proposition.
In the present case, the Government when served charge-sheet on the plaintiff, the same was under Rule 7 and not under Rule 8.
Under Rule 7 of the Rules, after serving a charge- sheet reply has to be sought from the delinquent employee and a regular enquiry is to be conducted and thereafter the punishing authority can impose major punishment and even minor punishment after taking into consideration the charge-sheet, reply and other evidence brought before the Enquiry Officer.
On the other hand, if the Government decides to proceed under Rule 8 of the Rules for imposing a minor punishment no second opportunity is required to be given to the employee.
However, in the present case, the plaintiff was served with charge-sheet under Rule 7 of the Rules.
This court in State of Punjab v. Ch.
Manphul Singh, 1986(1) S.L.J.
49 has held that once the proceeding is initiated for major punishment, then for inflicting minor penalty as well procedure prescribed for major penalty is required to be followed.
6.
The trial Court rightly granted ad interim injunction in favour of the plaintiff finding prima facie that the charge-sheet under Rule 7 of the Rules, which relates to major punishment was served on the plaintiff and the Government was to follow the procedure as provided under Rule 7 and could not impose punishment under Rule 8 of the Rules.
As a result thereof, the order of the first appellate Court is set aside and that of the trial Court is restored.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.
Revision allowed.