Ashok Bhan, J - This judgment shall dispose of the present CO CP No. 713 of 1990 and COCP No. 712 of 1990 as common question of law and fact is involved in both the cases.
Petitioners filed C.W.P.
No. 12026 of 1990 which was decided on 21111989 claiming higher pay scales in keeping with their higher qualifications as JBT/C & V teachers in the Punjab Education Department.
It was alleged that apart from the basic qualifications required for the post, they possessed or have since acquired the higher qualifications of BA Part-I/BA or Part-II/BA and were thus entitled to higher scale of pay in accordance with the instructions issued by the State of Punjab.
2.
The point in issue already stood settled by a Full Bench judgment of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 846 of 1986 (Om Parkash Arya v. State of Haryana) decided on 1251988 which was followed by a Division Bench judgment in Jetha Singh v. State of Punjab, 1988(4) SLR 300.
The Division Bench after hearing the learned counsel for the parties, issued the following two directions :-  "A direction is accordingly hereby issued to the respondents to examine and consider the claim of all the petitioners and if found eligible, to grant them the higher scale of pay and other consequential benefits accruing to them, according to their respective entitlement."
"Now that the legal position regarding the JBT/C & V Teachers for higher scale of pay, on the basis of their higher qualifications, stands settled, it would clearly be incumbent upon the authorities concerned to examine the cases of all such teachers claiming this benefit and to grant it to those found eligible, without driving them to this Court to obtain directions in this behalf."
The writ petitions were accordingly disposed of.
3.
Petitioners filed the present writ petition on the allegations that respondents have disobeyed the directions issued by this Court in C.W.P.
No. 12026 of 1990 deliberately and knowingly and prayed that the respondents be punished for committing the contempt of Court under the Contempt of Courts Act.
4.
In the written statement, the stand taken by the respondents is that in compliance with the orders of this court, the claim of the petitioners was examined individually and considered under the rules.
It was found that the petitioners were not eligible for the grant of higher scale of pay keeping in view their qualifications in accordance with the letter dated 23.7.1957.
It was further stated that the petitioners were not eligible for grant of consequential relief.
The relief claimed by the petitioners was declined by passing a speaking order No. 17/47-90 Grant-1(1) dated 14.12.1990 attached as Annexure R-1/T to the written statement.
It has been argued by the learned counsel for the petitioners that the order Annexure R-1/T dated 14.12.1990 is not in accordance with the decisions in Om Parkash Arya's case and Jetha Singh's case (supra) and that respondents have passed the wrong order contrary to the Full Bench decision of this Court knowingly and in utter disregard of the directions given by this Court in C.W.P.
No. 1226 of 1989.
The plea of the learned counsel of the respondents is that the only directions given by this Court in the writ petition filed by the petitioners was that the claim of the petitioners should be examined and considered and if found eligible then the respondents were directed to grant them the higher scale of pay and other consequential benefits according to their respective entitlement; accordingly the case of the petitioners has been considered and a speaking order passed.
Petitioners if aggrieved can challenge the said order by taking recourse to the proceedings in the appropriate Court.
5.
I find force in the submission of learned counsel for the respondents.
Directions of this Court issued in C.W.P.
No. 12026 of 1989 have been complied with.
Petitioners, if so advised, may resort to the proceedings as per the advise in the appropriate forum against the order Annexure R1/T.
So, no case for contempt is made out and both the contempt petitions are accordingly dismissed.
No costs.
Petitions dismissed.