VK Bali, J - Petitioner who is presently holding the post of Assistant Accountant at Branch Office of State Bank of Bikaner and Jaipur at Ludhiana takes exception to various orders and in particular order dated 15121987 (Annexure P. 25) order dated September 12, 1988 (Annexure P. 30) vide which the Disciplinary Authority awarded him major punishment as also order dated April 26, 1989 (Annexure P. 31) vide which his statutory appeal under the Rules was dismissed.
Before dealing with his contentions centered around challenge to the aforesaid two orders, it shall be useful to give a brief resume of facts culminating into the present petition.
2.
Having been initially appointed as a clerk on August 3, 1963 on account of various promotions that the petitioner earned during a long span of his service career, he at the relevant time was posted as Branch Manager Bhatinda when a criminal case was registered against him with the main allegations relating to purchase of 27 bills accompanied by railway receipts of four firms of Bhatinda.
Branch during the period of his posting as Branch Manager, at Bhatinda Branch under the instructions of his controlling authority.
The aforesaid railway receipts were stated to be false and fake and for that reason, the four firms were stated to have successfully cheated the Bank in which besides others, the petitioner was also stated to have a hand.
In as much as the trial launched against the petitioner was being unnecessarily delayed and the prosecution was still asking for time after obtaining 48 adjournments, the petitioner was constrained to file in this Court Criminal Misc. No. 5631 of 1984 which was rendered infructuous on account of the fact that the prosecution withdrew the case from the Court of Special Judge, Patiala on September 28, 1984, where it was pending.
However, the prosecution again filed charge-sheet against the petitioner and others on January 22, 1985, on the same allegations.
The petitioner was constrained to move another Criminal Misc. No. 5109 of 1985 for quashing the proceedings pending before Special Judge, Patiala.
It shall be pertinent to mention at this stage that the respondent Bank had also filed a civil suit against various firms which are stated to have cheated the Bank for the recovery of the money to the extent the Bank felt that it was cheated and the said suit was also filed against one PN Bhatnager, the Regional Manager.
Before the said Criminal Misc. came up for ultimate decision by this Court, the aforesaid civil suit had since been decreed.
The case of the petitioner is that far from alleging anything against him in the civil suit which was for the recovery of the amount with regard to false/fake receipts, reference of which has been given above, he was infact cited as a witness to support the cause of the Bank and the allegations of connivance, if at all, were made against aforesaid Shri PN Bhatnagar, the Regional Manager of the Bank.
However, when the Criminal Misc. came up for disposal, the counsel appearing for the prosecution was confronted with the judgment and decree passed by the Civil Court, reference of which has been given above and the findings recorded therein to the effect that in a civil suit between the State Bank of Bikaner and Jaipur and Chetan Prakash and others, the factum of conspiracy between Chetan Prakash, the borrower and PN Bhatnager, ex-Regional Manager of the Bank, raised in one of the issues, having been found to be non-existent, the Advocate appearing for the state wanted time to examine the Civil Court judgment to see the possibility if the charges could be dropped or modified.
The matter was adjourned to September 15, 1986.
On the adjourned date of hearing, this Court passed the following order :-  "Mr. Bachittar Singh appearing for the respondent-State of Punjab says that he has examined the civil Court judgment, reference of which has been made in the interim order dated August 4, 1986 passed by this Court.
He further says that in view thereof, the order of the learned Special Judge, Patiala and the charges framed in accordance therewith be quashed, leaving it open to the learned Judge to reframe the charges taking into consideration the Civil Court judgment.
In view of this concession, the impugned order/action as also the charges are quashed, leaving it open to the learned Judge to proceed further in accordance with law.
Parties, through their counsel, are directed to put in appearance before the learned Judge on 16th October, 1986."
3.
Admittedly Special Judge, Patiala before whom the criminal case, referred to above, was pending ultimately discharged the petitioner vide order copy of which is annexed with the present petition as annexure P9.
A perusal of the aforesaid order would reflect that the petitioner was not found to have obtained any pecuniary benefit but in the opinion of Special Judge, Patiala he had only committed certain irregularities for which he could have been dealt with departmentally.
In a nutshell, although allegations of conspiracy, abetment and the like charges were found to have been totally not substantiated, the Bank was still held to have suffered a financial loss which loss was attributed besides others to some irregularities committed by the petitioner as well for which he could be departmentally tried.
Whereas on one hand the respondent-Bank was proceeding against the petitioner on criminal charges, on the other hand it hand simultaneously prepared a memorandum of charges in the year 1982 to initiate departmental disciplinary proceedings against the petitioner under Regulation 68 of Chapter 10 of the State Bank of Bikaner and Jaipur (Officers) Service Regulation, 1979 (hereinafter to be referred as Regulations of 1979).
The case of petitioner is that the subject matter of charges in departmental proceedings and the criminal proceedings launched against the petitioner related to the same item of purchase of 27 bills and railway receipts which as per case of the Bank were found to be fake.
Vide order dated March 23, 1983 one Shri SM Masaldan was appointed as Inquiring Authority by the General Manager (Operations) to enquire into the articles of charges framed against the petitioner.
The petitioner is stated to have been served with another charge-sheet vide letter dated April 7, 1986 regarding which his case is that the enquiry was conducted at his back and in an irregular and illegal manner without giving any opportunity of defence and without supplying the copies of the proceedings held on different dates.
Vide order dated December 15, 1987, without first giving the report of Enquiry Officer to the petitioner, a major penalty was imposed by the Disciplinary Authority whereby the basic pay of the petitioner was reduced from Rs. 2,675/- to the lowest stage of Rs. 1,175/- per month in the Junior Management Grade-I The petitioner filed an appeal against the order aforesaid before the Chief General Manager but in the meantime as per circular letter dated March 25, 1988 the petitioner was placed/fitted to Middle Management Grade Scale-II and vide order dated January 14, 1989 the petitioner was fitted in the Middle Management Grade-II with effect from August 1, 1983.
The Appellate Authority i.e. the Chief General Manager was left with no choice but to refer the appeal to the Managing Director who vide his order dated August 9, 1988 remitted the matter to be decided by the Chief General Manager which was the Disciplinary Authority of the petitioner, in view of changed grades of the petitioner.
The new Disciplinary Authority of the Petitioner, Chief General Manager thereafter passed the order dated September 12, 1988.
It may be mentioned here that the earlier order imposing penalty upon the petitioner by the earlier Disciplinary Authority vide order dated December 15, 1987 was passed with the approval of Chief General Manager.
The Chief General Manager vide order dated September 12, 1988 once again imposed major penalty on the petitioner to the effect that he shall be demoted from Middle Management Grade Scale-II to Junior Management and fixed his basic pay at Rs. 1,175/- per month in the Junior Management Grade Scale-I with effect from January 1, 1988.
It is this order as also the order passed by the Appellate Authority on his appeal against the said order, Annexures P30 and P31 which the petitioner basically contends are illegal and deserve to be quashed.
The appeal of the petitioner was dismissed on April 26, 1989 by the Managing Director respondent.
4.
The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has mainly raised two points.
His first contention is that the petitioner cannot be made to suffer and proceeded with departmentally with regard to the same charges which were subject matter of criminal trial against him and in the criminal trial admittedly he was discharged after a clear finding by the court of competent jurisdiction that the allegations of conspiracy or abetment etc. were not at all substantiated.
His second contention is that the petitioner was neither heard at the time when the Disciplinary Authority passed the order Annexure P30 nor at the time when the appeal was heard by the Appellate Authority and, therefore, the principle of natural justice i.e. audialteram partem was violated in the present case at every relevant and crucial stage.
5.
Mr. HN Mehtani, the learned counsel appearing for the Bank, on the other hand, seriously contests the points raised by the petitioner and contends that it was always open to the employer to proceed departmentally against an employee even if on the same charges a Court of competent jurisdiction has returned a finding of not guilty.
In any case, contends the counsel, that there was additional charge-sheet, submitted against the petitioner and, therefore, on the allegations contained in the second charge-sheet, the Bank could proceed against the petitioner and on prooof of the allegations made in the said charge-sheet, the petitioner could be adequately punished.
Mr. Mehtani on the second question raised by the counsel for the petitioner maintains that Regulations of 1979 of the Bank did not contain any rule which may guarantee a right or hearing to the petitioner either at the stage when the order was passed by the Disciplinary Authority or at the Appellate Stage.
It is not disputed, however, that such a right was actually demanded by the petitioner.
6.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length and am of the considered view that the first point raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner has no merit whereas on the second point, the petitioner deserves to succeed in a limited manner.
It is true that the Special Judge in Annexure P9 clearly opined that no case of conspiracy or cheating was made out against the petitioner or for that matter even against PN Bhatnagar against whom the Bank had even filed a civil suit for recovery yet the irregularities committed by the petitioner were not ruled out.
On the contrary it was clearly said by the Special Judge that for the irregularities committed by the petitioner he could be departmentally tried.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has not been able to support his first contention from any decided case law to persuade me to hold that in the circumstances aforesaid acquittal in a criminal case on the charges of conspiracy and cheating would in itself be enough to debar the employer from proceeding departmentally even with regard to the allegations of carelessness and irregularities committed by an employee.
The petitioner may not have had any hand in cheating.
The parties had admittedly cheated the Bank and the petitioner may not have even any intention to abet the commission of crime but if he has been negligent in performing his duties and has acted against the settled procedure then on that count at least the department can certainly proceed against him.
It is true that the gravity of the charges would not be that much and obviously the consequences would also not be that grave but that does not mean that the department cannot proceed for minor lapses that might still be made against an employee.
7.
Coming now to the second contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner as referred to above, the fact that the petitioner was not heard at any stage i.e. neither before the Disciplinary Authority nor before the Appellate Authority has not been disputed by the counsel appearing for the bank.
It is also not disputed that such a right was demanded by the petitioner.
In the circumstances now the question to be decided is as to whether it is the well established principle of audi alteram partem which would hold the field or it is the procedure prescribed under the Regulations of 1979 and in particular silence in the Rules with regard to grant or non-grant of opportunity which will hold the field so as to result in the finding that such a hearing was neither necessary.
This question is res intergra and in a recent decision rendered by a Division Bench of this court in The United Commercial Bank v. SC Girotra, 1991(1) SCT.
419 : 1991 Recent Services Judgments 45, it has been held if there is no provision under the Service Rules of the Bank then before imposing punishment, no show cause notice is required to be given to the delinquent officer nor is he required to be heard but personal hearing cannot be denied to him by the Appellate Authority.
In so far as the question of hearing before the Appellate Authority is concerned, that stands determined against the respondent-Bank but in so far as the question of hearing before the Disciplinary Authority is concerned, in view of the facts and circumstances of the present case, I feel the same too was necessary.
It is proved on the records of the present case that the report of the Enquiry Officer was not given to the petitioner at the time when originally the order of major punishment was passed against him.
In fact it was given to him only at a time when the order of punishment was passed i.e. the petitioner was supplied with the order of punishment and enquiry reports simultaneously.
It is true that at the time when the Appellate Authority remitted the case to new Disciplinary Authority, the report of Enquiry Officer was available with the petitioner but if is equally true that the new Disciplinary Authority neither heard the petitioner nor the petitioner was permitted to say anything new which he could have said on receipt of enquiry report by him.
In Union of India v. Mohd.
Ramzam Khan, 1991(1) SCT.
111 : Judgments Today 1990(4) SC 456, their Lordships of the Supreme Court held as under :-  "We make it clear that wherever there has been an Inquiry Officer and he has furnished a report to the disciplinary authority at the conclusion of the enquiry holding the delinquent guilty of all or any of the charges with proposal for any particular punishment or not, the delinquent is entitled to a copy of such report and will also be entitled to make a representation against it, if he so desires, and non-furnishing of the report would amount to violation of rules of natural justice and make the final order liable to challenge hereafter."
8.
It is true that a Division Bench of this Court in case.
The United Commercial Bank (supra) has held that when there is no provision under the Services Rules of the Bank that before imposing punishment, any show cause notice is required to be given or the delinquent officer is to be heard, no fault can be found with the order of dismissal on the ground that before passing the order of dismissal on the ground that before passing the order, no show cause notice or opportunity of hearing was granted to the petitioner.
While the aforesaid decision came into being on its own facts, nothing like non-supply of enquiry report or the right of the petitioner to submit a representation against the enquiry report and consequences thereof came to be interpreted or decided by the Hon'ble Division Bench.
In any case Ramzan Khan's case came to be decided by the Supreme Court on November 11, 1990 whereas the Division Bench of this Court came into being on August 18, 1990.
Even if the said point was available to the petitioner before the Division Bench, the same may not have been pressed into service for the reason that by that time the Hon'ble Supreme Court had not decided the case of Ramzan Khan.
I am, therefore, of the opinion that whereas the Enquiry Officer has given a report and the same is either not made available to the petitioner or no breathing time is given to him as has happened in the present case to give him a chance to make a representation against the said report then in that case he is required to be heard before any order of punishment is passed against him.
The facts of the present case would demonstrate that the Appellate Authority in the first instance had remitted the case to a new Disciplinary Authority only on technical point i.e. inasmuch as the petitioner had improved in his status, under the Rules the Disciplinary Authority was to be a different one than when he had not improved in his status.
For all intents and purposes, the remand of the case to a new Disciplinary Authority was considered to be only a technicality and it is proved on the record that without asking the petitioner thereafter to make any representation either in person or in writing nor providing him any opportunity to do so, the Disciplinary Authority had proceeded with the case on the same state of evidence and report of Enquiry Officer and far from maintaining the earlier punishment had even reverted the petitioner to a lower rank by still further increasing the punishment which was initially inflicted upon the petitioner.
In the peculiar facts and circumstances of the present case and particularly when the new Disciplinary Authority was to increase the punishment I am of the considered view that the petitioner ought to have been heard or atleast asked to file a representation against the proposed punishment which was to be given to him by the new Disciplinary Authority.
9.
For the reasons aforesaid, this Writ Petition is allowed.
Orders Annexures P25, P30 and P31 are quashed and a direction is issued to the respondent-Bank that the matter which is already gathering dust for the last more than nine years should be expeditiously disposed of and in no case the authorities should take more than six months to pass the order on the original side and the appellate side if at all any appeal is necessitated, in accordance with rules and by adhering to the principles of natural justice.
10.
Before I part with this judgment, I must notice another contention of the petitioner which is with regard to bias of Disciplinary Authority against him.
The counsel for the petitioner contends that the first order of Disciplinary Authority was passed with the approval of the new Disciplinary Authority and when the matter came back to him, the punishment was enhanced.
On aforesaid contention alone, no case of bias is made out, yet considering the well settled principles of law that justice must not only be done but must appear to have been done and by following the same, I direct that if the post of Chief General Manager is still occupied by the same officer then the case of the petitioner shall be decided by some other Chief General Manager who shall be the Disciplinary Authority of the petitioner.
In the peculiar facts and circumstances of the present case, there shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.