RS Mongia, J - This is a writ petition filed by the Punjab State Electricity Board, Patiala (hereinafter referred to as the 'Board'), challenging the award of Labour Court, Bhatinda, dated 6th March, 1990, (Annexure P.3), by which it was held that the dismissal of Jagtar Singh, Respondent No. 2, workman, was illegal and the same was set aside.
It was further held that the Management i.e. the Board was at liberty to pass fresh orders in accordance with law.
2.
Briefly the facts of the case are that Jagtar Singh, respondent-workman, while working as a Line Superintendent with the Board in Ferozepur Circle, was caught accepting illegal gratification on 4th May, 1977, from one Shri Jasmail Singh.
A case under Section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act and Section 161 of the Indian Panal Code was registered against the respondent-workman and the trial Court vide its order dated 6th January, 1978 convicted the respondent-workman and awarded him two years' rigorous imprisonment and a fine of Rs. 100/-.
This conviction and sentence was upheld by this Court as well as by the Supreme Court.
The service conditions of the respondent-workman were governed by the Regulations known as the Punjab State Electricity Board Employees Punishment and Appeal, Regulations, 1971 (hereinafter called the Regulations).
Regulation 14 of the Regulations is in the following terms :-  "14.
Notwithstanding anything contained in Regulations 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, and 13 :- i) Where any penalty is imposed on an employee on the ground of conduct which has led to his conviction on a criminal charge; or ii) Where the punishing authority is satisfied for reason to be recorded by it in writing that it is not reasonably practicable to hold an inquiry in the manner provided in these regulations; or iii) Where the Board is satisfied that in the interest of the security of the State, it is not expedient to hold enquiry in the manner provided in these regulations, the punishing authority may consider the circumstances of the case and make such orders thereon as it deems fit."
On the basis of the conduct, which had led to the conviction of the respondent on a criminal charge, the Chief Engineer of the Board dismissed the petitioner from service vide order darted 14th September, 1978, with effect from 6th January, 1978 (the date of the conviction of the respondent by the trial Court).
The respondent-workman had filed an appeal before the Board against the order of his dismissal.
However, the Board dismissed the appeal.
The respondent-workman filed a writ petition in this Court, being C.W.P.
No. 1471 of 1979, challenging the order of his dismissal as well as the appellate order.
After admission of the writ petition, which came up for hearing on 13th August, 1986, the same was dismissed as infructuous on the statement of the counsel for the workman Jagtar Singh (petitioner in C.W.P.
No. 1471 of 1979 and now respondent in the present case), by passing the following order :-  "The learned counsel for the petitioner states that this petition be dismissed as infructuous, as according to him, the conviction of the petitioner has been maintained upto the Supreme Court.
Dismissed as infructuous."
3.
It has been further alleged in the writ petition that respondent Jagtar Singh without disclosing the fact of his dismissal from service, got an appointment as Demonstrator in Government Polytechnic, Guru Teg Bahadurgarh on 2nd May, 1982.
However, when this fact had come to the notice of the Authorities, a show cause notice for the termination of his service was issued to him on 5th June, 1987.
The said show cause notice was challenged by Respondent No. 2 by filing a writ petition in this court being C.W.P.
No. 4137 of 1987, which was dismissed on 18th November, 1987, by passing the following order :-  "It is not denied that the petitioner was earlier convicted under the Corruption Act.
Rather this was suppressed while taking the present job.
In this view of the matter, the petitioner is not entitled to any relief.
Dismissed with costs.
Costs Rs.
500/-."
4.
After the dismissal of the aforesaid writ petition, it was some time in December, 1988 (as told to me by the counsel for the parties) that respondent-workman filed a claim petition with the Board that this dismissal order dated 14th September, 1978 was illegal and he was entitled to reinstatement.
The matter was taken up with the Government and the Government referred the dispute to the Labour Court under the Industrial Disputes Act.
The Labour Court vide its award dated 6th March, 1990, held that the order of dismissal was illegal inasmuch as there was nothing on the record to show that opportunity of hearing had been given to the workman before passing the order of dismissal.
It was further held that the dismissal order with retrospective effect was invalid and illegal.
As observed above, it is this award that has been impugned in this writ petition.
5.
The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the impugned award was liable to be set aside inasmuch as under Regulation 14 of the Regulations, no opportunity of hearing to the delinquent officer/official is envisaged.
Since, according to the learned counsel, the dismissed order was based on the misconduct, which had led to the conviction of respondent-Jagtar Singh, it was not necessary to hold an enquiry or give an opportunity of hearing and the competent Authority on the facts and circumstances, could pass the order.
The counsel further argued that in fact the dismissal order had been challenged in this Court by respondent Jagtar Singh by filing C.W.P.
No. 1471 of 1979, and on the statement of Respondent No. 2 (petitioner in that case) the said writ petition was dismissed as infructuous, as Jagtar Singh's conviction had been maintained upto Supreme Court.
Under these circumstances, learned counsel submitted that the raising of the dispute before the Labour Court regarding the same dismissal order was barred by the principles of res judicata.
In any case, the learned counsel submitted that the State Government should also keep in mind while referring the matter as to whether it is a stale demand that is being raised and whether it should be referred to the Labour Court for its adjudication, or not.
6.
The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the workman submitted that though Regulation 14 of the Regulations did not envisage any hearing, but under the rules of natural justice, hearing was required.
He further submitted that res judicata would not come in, inasmuch as the decision in C.W.P.
No. 1471 of 1979 was not on merits, and further, though this point was raised before the Labour Court, but no arguments were addressed on this point.
He further submitted that it is not for the State Government to see whether a belated claim should be referred for adjudication or not and it is only for the Labour Court to see this aspect while granting relief.
It was also argued that the order of dismissal was liable to be set aside on the ground that it had been passed with retrospective effect.
Further according to the learned counsel, the workman was entitled to the wages from the date of the award till the date of decision of this Court even if the decision was to go against the workman.
7.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties at length, I am of the view that the Labour Court went wrong in holding that the order of dismissal was illegal as no hearing was granted to the workman.
Under Regulation 14 of the Regulations, no such hearing is envisaged, and even under the rules of natural justice, such a hearing would not be required, inasmuch as it is for the competent Authority to pass any order under Regulation 14 on the basis of misconduct which had led to conviction.
No enquiry or any show cause notice is envisaged under Regulation 14 of the Regulations.
In the Divisional Personnel Officer, Southern Railway and another v. TR Challappan, AIR 1975 SC 2216, where a similar provision like Regulation 14 was being interpreted, it was held by the Supreme Court that hearing was necessary.
However, this authority was over-ruled by a Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court in Union of India and another v. Tulsiram Patel, AIR 1985 SC 1416.
Consequently, I hold that the award is liable to be set aside on this ground.
8.
Coming to the point of res judicata, no doubt that no argument was addressed by the petitioner before the Labour Court regarding res judicata, but from the facts mentioned above, it would be evident that respondent-workman did not invite a decision from this Court in C.W.P.
No. 1471 of 1979, whether his dismissal order was good or bad, but was contented by getting the writ petition dismissed on the statement of his counsel that the conviction had been upheld upto the Supreme Court.
In other words, this meant that he had no argument to offer regarding his dismissal, inasmuch as he was satisfied that the dismissal order was good, as the conviction had been upheld upto the Supreme Court.
Under these circumstances, the principle of res judicata would come in as otherwise it will amount to abuse of the process of Court.
9.
I am also of the opinion that it is not open to the workman to raise a dispute any time, nor it is for the State Government to refer a dispute at any time.
The State Government must see whether the claim put forth by a workman is belated and stale and whether there is some reasonable explanation for the delay.
Even the limitation for filing a civil suit is three years and in the present case, the claim application was filed after 10 years of the dismissal of the workman.
According to me, no such reference should have been made at such a belated stage.
10.
As far as the dismissal order with retrospective effect is concerned, the same cannot stand.
The dismissal order cannot be passed with retrospective effect as held by the Supreme Court in R Jeevaratnam v. State of Madras, AIR 1966 SC 951.
However, the order of effective from the date it is passed.
Consequently, the order of dismissal would take effect from the date on which it was passed, i.e. 14th September, 1978.
Under Regulation 4(2) (b) of the Regulations, the period after conviction till an order of punishment is passed, is to be treated under suspension.
Consequently, respondent-workman will be treated under suspension from 6th January, 1978 to 13th September, 1978, and would be entitled to the subsistence allowance or any other allowance permissible under the Rules.
11.
The only question which remains to be decided is whether respondent-workman would be entitled to any wages from the date of the award till the decision of this case.
The Motion Bench had stayed the operation of the award.
The learned counsel for the workman submits that irrespective of the result of the writ petition, the workman is entitled to wages under Section 17-B of the Industrial Disputes Act from the date of the award till the decision of the writ petition.
I am afraid, I cannot agree with this submission.
Once the operation of the award had been stayed, and, ultimately the writ petition is dismissed, it cannot be taken that during the interregnum period the workman is deemed to have worked and is entitled to wages.
12.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is allowed and the impugned award dated 6th March, 1990 (Annexure P.3) is hereby set aside with a proviso that the dismissal order of the workman will be effective from 14th September, 1978 and not 6th January, 1978 and the respondent-workman would be treated under suspension for the said period under Regulation No. 4(2)(b) of the Regulations and would be entitled to the allowances as admissible to a suspended employee under the Regulations.
I leave the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.