AS Nehra, J - This appeal has been filed by the plaintiff-appellant against the judgment and decree dated 2081987 passed by the Additional District Judge, Ludhiana, by which the appeal filed by the defendants-respondents was dismissed as having become infructuous.
2.
The plaintiff-appellant is a Junior Scientific Assistant in the service of the Export Inspectioin Agency, Ludhiana.
In the seniority list prepared on 111981 by the Director, Export Inspection Council, New Delhi, the plaintiff was placed at Serial No. 13.
He alleged that the Director promoted only those officers who were his favourites.
He maintained that he was placed under suspension in May, 1980 by the Director without any rhyme and reason and then in December, 1981 suspension order was revoked without holding any enquiry or without serving any charge-sheet on him.
The plaintiff further alleged that, according to the seniority list, defendant Nos. 2 to 7 are at Serial Nos. 14 to 19; defendant Nos. 8 to 10 at Serial Nos. 21 to 23; defendant Nos. 11 to 14 at Serial Nos. 24 to 27; and defendant Nos. 15 to 16 are at Serial Nos. 29 and 30.
The officers mentioned at Serial Nos. 1 to 12 of the seniority list had been promoted before October, 1979.
The case of the plaintiff-appellant is that on 30.10.1979 he was the senior-most Junior Scientific Assistant and was entitled to promotion to the post of Technical Officer.
He further averred that the above-mentioned defendants were junior to him but they were promoted whereas he was superseded.
The other defendants, who were junior to the plaintiff, were also promoted later on.
The other defendants, who were promoted later on, were made parties to the suit during the pendency of the trial.
The suit of the plaintiff, therefore, was for a decree for declaration that he be deemed to have been promoted as Technical Officer with all rights and allowances payable to him as such i.e., from 30.10.1979 and also a decree for permanent injunction restraining the Director from promoting the officers junior to him.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of defendant No. 1, seniority of the plaintiff at Serial No. 13 of the seniority list has been acknowledged.
Allegations of mala fide made against the Director have, however, been controverted.
It has been averred that the plaintiff could not be considered for promotion to the post of Technical Officer as he did not possess essential educational qualifications prescribed in the recruitment Rules.
The fact of the plaintiff having been placed under suspension and his reinstatement later on has been admitted.
It has been maintained that the misconduct on the part of the plaintiff led to his suspension and that he was reinstated and an enquiry into the matter was ordered, the result of which is still awaited.
The other pleas taken in the written statement, inter alia, are that the civil court has not jurisdiction to look into the matter and the suit is not maintainable in the present form and the suit is not properly valued for the purposes of the Court-fee and jurisdiction.
4.
The pleas taken by the other defendants, in their respective written statements, are to the same effect as that filed on behalf of defendant No1.
5.
On the basis of the aforementioned pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed :-  1.
Whether the supersession of the plaintiff is illegal, void and against the principle of equity, good conscience and natural justice ?
2.
Whether the suit is not properly valued for the purposes of Court-fee and jurisdiction ?
3.
Whether the suit is not maintainable in the present form ?
4.
Whether the Court has no jurisdiction to entertain the suit ?
5.
Relief.
6.
Issue No. 1 was decided in favour of the plaintiff.
The trial Court held that the name of the plaintiff should have been considered, because he did not suffer from any disqualification.
It was further held that the supersession of the plaintiff at least by those officers who were promoted before the coming into force of the Recruitment Rules is illegal, void and against the principles of natural justice.
Issue Nos. 2, 3 and 4 were also decided in favour of the plaintiff-appellant and the suit filed by the plaintiff-appellant was decreed by the trial Court on 20.7.1984 and defendant No. 1 was directed to consider the name of the plaintiff for promotion to the post of Technical Officer in accordance with the instructions/Rules etc. applicable to the case at the time when a person junior to the plaintiff was first promoted to the post of Technical Officer ignoring the name of the plaintiff.
7.
Aggrieved by the judgment and decree passed by the trial Court, defendant No1 filed an appeal before the Additional District Judge, Ludhiana.
On 2081987, the appeal was taken up for arguments by the lower appellate Court.
The lower appellate court put a question to Shri SR Wadehra, Advocate, counsel for respondent No. 1 to the effect that when the decree has been complied with, then this appeal has become infructuous.
Counsel for the plaintiff-appellant vehemently argued that the name of the plaintiff was not considered in accordance with the decree passed by the trial Court.
The lower appellate Court held that the plaintiff had no right to make any argument in the appeal before it, particularly when he did not prefer cross-examinations and, if any right of the plaintiff has been infringed, then he can seek the remedy through any other process available to him.
The lower appellate court held that once the decree has been passed and that has been complied with, then in such state of affairs the suit does not become infructuous; rather the appeal becomes infructuous and the appeal filed by defendant No. 1 was dismissed as having become infructuous.
8.
Learned counsel for the appellant, Mr. GS Punia has argued that the learned lower appellate Court has erred in law in giving the finding that the decree of the trial Court has been complied with.
He has stated that the lower appellate Court could either dismiss the appeal or accept the appeal but the lower appellate Court has not jurisdiction to hold that the decree passed by the trial Court has been complied with.
He has further argued that the lower appellate court should have decided the appeal on merits.
9.
The learned counsel for the appellant has further submitted that the lower appellate Court had no jurisdiction to hold that the decree of the trial Court has been complied with.
The learned counsel for defendant-respondent No. 1 has also submitted that only the executing Court is competent to hold that the decree has been complied with or not.
The learned counsel for defendant-respondent No. 1 has further submitted that he has no objection if the finding of the lower appellate Court in paragraph 6 of its judgment, to the effect that the decree has been complied with, is set aside.
Therefore, the finding of the lower appellate Court, to the effect that the decree of the trial Court has been complied with, is set aside.
10.
The appeal filed by defendant-respondent No. 1 before the lower appellate Court was not argued on merits.
Since the appeal before the lower appellate Court was dismissed as infructuous, therefore, this case has to be sent back for fresh decision of that appeal on merits.
The learned counsel for defendant-respondent No. 1 has submitted that since the decree of the trial Court has been complied with, therefore, defendant-respondent No. 1 does not want any fresh decision on merits on the appeal filed before the Additional District Judge, Ludhiana.
The appeal filed by defendant-respondent No. 1 was also not argued on merits before the lower appellate Court.
Therefore, this case is not being remanded to the lower appellate Court for fresh decision on merits and the present appeal is dismissed with no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.