Amarjeet Chaudhary, J (Oral) - This order will dispose of CWP Nos. 3217 and 12360 of 1990, involving common questions of law and facts.
For the purpose of order, facts have been picked up from C.W.P.
No. 3217 of 1990.
2.
This is workman's writ petition for quashing the Award of the Labour Court dated 181989, copy Annexure P-5 to the writ petition.
3.
The facts leading to the filing of the writ petition are that the petitioner was appointed Technician in the Department of Industries, Punjab, in 1965.
In 1984, the Leather Centres under the Department of Industries, Punjab, were transferred to the Punjab State Leather Development Corporation (for short 'the Corporation').
Petitioner's services were consequently transferred to the Corporation and he was appointed as Technician in Rural Industrial Development Centre (Leather), Ajnala on 1081984, in the grade of Rs. 450-15-525/16-600-20-700-25/800 plus allowances, as admissible to the employees of the Corporation.
There was a clause in the above said letter that the petitioner will be on probation for period of one year.
Vide order dated 1071985 petitioner's period of probation was extended by another year.
Vide order dated 2081985, services of the petitioner were terminated in terms of the appointment letter.
Aggrieved by the aforesaid order the petitioner raised an industrial dispute and the same was referred to the Labour Court of adjudication.
The terms of the reference was :  "Whether termination of services of Ram Sarup workman was justified and in order ?
If not, to what relief/exact amount of compensation is he entitled ?"
4.
The case of the petitioner is that once termination or discharge is by way of punishment, it was incumbent upon the employer to initiate departmental enquiry to enable the delinquent official to explain his conduct.
The other plea raised at the bar is that the petitioner had rendered more than 20 years service in the department of Industries Punjab and he cannot be treated as a fresh appointee.
5.
The case of the Management before the Labour Court was that the services of the workman were terminated as he did not discharge his duties satisfactorily and the Management was left with no other alternative but to dispense with the services of the petitioner during the period of probation in accordance with terms and conditions of his appointment letter.
The stand of the respondent-Corporation in the written statement is that as per terms and conditions of petitioner's appointment and also per service laws of the Corporation, the workman's services could be terminated by giving one month notice during the period of probation.
6.
On a consideration of the matter, I am of the view that the order of termination of petitioner's service cannot legally be sustained.
The reason for terminating the service of the petitioner is that he remained absent from duty on two occasions from 14111984 to 31.12.1984 and from 2241985 and did not join duty despite repeated reminders.
As the work and conduct of the petitioner was not satisfactory, the Management had dispensed with the services of the petitioner during the period of probation in accordance with the terms and conditions of his appointment letter and Service Laws of the Corporation.
It has not been stated by the respondent-Corporation that any Show Cause Notice was served upon the petitioner or enquiry was conducted against him.
7.
The law is now well settled that if the discharge or termination of Govt. servant is by way of punishment, the delinquent official has a right to be afforded an opportunity of being heard in the matter.
The employer is bound to hold the departmental enquiry before dispensing with the services.
It is not the case of the respondents that before dispensing with the services of the petitioner any Show Cause Notice was given to him or enquiry was conducted.
The Courts have time and again held that if any order of penal nature adversely affecting the rights of a workman/Govt.
employee is passed, before dispensing with the service of the employee concerned, full procedure as required under the law/rule is to be followed.
In Dr.(Mrs) Sumati P Shere v. Union of India and others 1989(2) S.L.R.
423, it was held by the Supreme Court :  "In the relationship of master and servant there is a moral obligation to act fairly.
An informal, if not formal, give-and-take, on the assessment of work of the employee should be there.
The employee should be made aware of the defect in his work and deficiency in his performance.
Defects or deficiencies; indifference or indiscretion may be with the employee by inadvertence and not by incapacity to work.
Timely communication of the assessment of work in such cases may put the employee on the right track.
Without any such communication, in our opinion, it would be arbitrary to give a movement order to the employee on the ground of unsuitability."
In the instant case, the impugned order of termination appears to be simpliciter, but has been issued by way of punishment.
The law is well settled that where removal is ordered on account of punishment, then an enquiry is required to be conducted and an opportunity is to be given to the delinquent official.
In the case of Anoop Jaiswal v. Government of India and another, A.I.R. 1984 Supreme Court 636, it was held as under :-  "Where the form of the order is merely a camouflage for any order of dismissal for misconduct, it is always open to the Court before which the order is challenged to go behind the form and ascertain the true character of the order.
If the Court holds that the order though in the form is merely a determination of employment is in reality a cloak for an order of punishment the Court would not be debarred, merely because of the form of the order in giving effect to the rights conferred by law upon the employee."
It is well settled that in dealing with a Govt. servant the State must conform to the constitutional requirement of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
An arbitrary exercise of power by the State violates those constitutional guarantees, for a fundamental implication in the guarantees of equality and of protection against discrimination is that fair and just treatment will be accorded to all whether individually or jointly as a class.
8.
Another important aspect of the matter is that the petitioner had rendered more than 20 years of service with the erstwhile employer i.e. Department of Industries Punjab with unblemished service record and the respondent-Corporation treated him as a new entrant and kept him on probation for a period of one year.
In fact, the petitioner's services were transferred to the Corporation consequent upon that the transfer of Leather Centres to the Punjab State Leather Development Corporation.
As such, he should not have been treated as a fresh appointee.
Since the Labour Court has not taken into account the settled law and background of the earlier service of the petitioner, so its award dated 181989, Annexure P-5, is also not sustainable.
9.
For the reasons recorded above, the terminated order, Annexure P-4, as well as the Award of the Labour Court dated 181989.
Annexure P-5, are quashed and the writ petition is allowed without any order as to costs.
The petitioner shall be reinstated in service with full back wages and continuity of service.
He shall also be entitled to all other consequential benefits.
This order shall be implemented within two months from the receipt of the same.
Petition allowed.