MS Liberhan, J - This order of mine will dispose of Civil Writ Petition No. 5435 of 1987 as well as COCP No. 1111 of 1989.
2.
The services of the workman were terminated on 3031981.
The workman prayed for reference of the dispute which was referred to the Labour Court on 2.11.1981.
The Labour Court after recording ex parte evidence found that the services of the workman were terminated illegally and resultantly reinstated the workman with full back wages w.e.f.
3031981 at the rate of Rs. 400/- per month.
The award was pronounced on August 18, 1982 and it was published in the official gazette on 22101982. the petitioner applied to the Labour Court for setting aside the ex parte order, inter alia, contending that no notice was ever issued or served on the management.
Though the Labour Court found that no notice was served on the management still the management having approached the Court for setting aside the ex parte order after the expiry of limitation of 30 days even from the date of knowledge, it declined to set aside the ex parte order.
The petitioner management challenged the order dated 621987 refusing to set aside the ex parte order.
This Court while disposing of the writ petition vide its order dated 20.5.1987 passed the following order :  "After hearing the learned counsel, we find that the matter is fully covered by decision of Division Bench of this court reported as 1986(3) S.L.R.
586.
In view of the observations therein, we do not find sufficient reason to interfere with the main award.
Consequently, the writ petition is dismissed in limine."
3.
The management now through this writ petition has impugned the award dated 1881982, inter alia, contending that the award having been passed at the back of the petitioner was void and was liable to be set aside.
The learned counsel for the petition relied on Grindlays Bank Ltd v. The Central Government Industrial Tribunal and others, AIR 1981 Supreme Court, 606, wherein it has been observed as under :-  "When sub-section (1) of Section 11 expressly and in clear terms confers power upon the Tribunal to regulate its own procedure, it must necessarily be endowed with all powers which bring about an adjudication of an existing industrial dispute, after affording all the parties an opportunity of a hearing.
We are inclined to the view that where a party is prevented from appearing at the hearing due to a sufficient cause, and is faced with an ex parte award, it is as if the party is visited with an award without a notice of the proceedings.
It is needless to stress that where the Tribunal proceeds to make an award without notice to a party, the award is nothing but a nullity.
In such circumstances, the Tribunal has not only the power but also the duty to set aside the ex parte award and to direct the matter to be heard afresh."
4.
There is no quarrel with the proposition of law laid down by Hon'ble Supreme Court as cited by learned counsel for the petitioner.
5.
I am of the considered view that the petitioner having challenged the order of refusal to set aside the ex parte award and having failed in the same, particularly when, while disposing the petition the Division Bench of this Court had even affirmed the main award, the petitioner cannot revert back to challenge the main award.
All these reliefs were available to the petitioner, when earlier it preferred writ petition No. 2049 of 1987 which was disposed of by a speaking and a reasoned order.
The order operates as res judicata between the parties.
That order obtained finality as it was not challenged in accordance with law.
The attempt of the petitioner appears to be to tire out the poor workman by challenging the proceedings piecemeal.
Order 2 Rule 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure provides for a sound principle for bringing an end to a litigation and is applicable to the writ proceedings in its letter and spirit.
It is the interest of the society at large that at some point of time of litigation is brought to an end.
For the reasons recorded above, I find no force in the writ petition.
The same is dismissed with costs.
Costs.
Rs. 1000/-.
6.
It may be noticed that the services of the workman were terminated as far back as in 1981 and almost four years have passed the workman has not been taken into service.
The stay order granted by this court was subject to the provisions of Section 17-B of the Industrial Disputes Act.
It is not disputed that neither the workman was taken back on duty nor any salary as last drawn by him has been paid to him till today.
The only contention raised by the learned counsel for the management is that the workman has not reported for duty which fact has been disputed by the workman.
At this stage, the learned counsel for the workman states that the workman can report on duty forthwith and the petitioner should take him on the job.
The petitioner undertakes to pay half of the arrears of salary within three months from today and the remaining half within next three months.
It has been brought to my notice that on 22.8.1988 stay was granted subject to the petitioner filing an undertaking that back wages shall be paid with 12% interest from the due date till the payment, in the eventuality of the writ petition being dismissed.
The petitioner management contends that during all the period the workman remained gainfully employed and the management is ready and willing to produce the vouchers etc. to prove the same which, in my considered view, will open a new litigation.
At this stage, the learned counsel for the workman states that he is ready and willing to forego 12% interest in case the petitioner pays arrears of salary as stated above.
The learned counsel for the petitioner agrees for the same.
In view of the stand taken by the parties, the petitioner-management is directed to pay helf of arrears within three months from today and the remaining half within three months thereafter.
If any of the terms of the order are not observed in its letter and spirit, the petitioner shall be liable to pay 12% interest from the due date till the date of payment.
The contempt petition also stands disposed of with no order as to costs.
Petition disposed of.