GC Mital, C.J.
(Oral) - Rule.
D.B.
On 29th November, 1985, the Labour Court gave no dispute award in the presence of Mr. SL Kashyap, who was the secretary of the union, of which the workman was a member, and his authorised representative.
The award was published in the gazette on 5th June, 1988 and it became enforceable after expiry of 30 days.
2.
More than two years after the publication of the award on behalf of the workman, the same authorised representative filed an application under order 9 rule 13, Civil Procedure Code on 4th July, 1988 stating that the workman was not served in the reference.
The Labour Court by order dated 6th November, 1989 allowed the application and set aside the award by observing as follows :  "There is absolutely nothing to show that the union had intimated the workman about the reference.
On the other hand the workman has stated on oath in his affidavit that he had gone to his village and that he had no information of reference.
In these circumstances, it will not be fair to penalise by workman for an irresponsible statement made by the Secretary of the Union."
3.
As already pointed out, Sh. SL Kashyap had appeared for the workman in the proceedings before the Labour Court which culminated in the award darted 29th November, 1985 and the same person, the secretary of union had filed the application under Order 9 rule 13 C.P.C.
In this view of the matter, we are of the view that the Labour Court was not justified, on the facts of the case, in setting aside the award.
4.
There is another jurisdictional point, which arises in this case.
It has been held in Grindlays Bank Ltd v. The Central Government Industrial Tribunal and others, AIR 1981 SC 606 that the Labour Court retains jurisdiction to entertain an application under order 9 rule 13, C.P.C. till expiry of 30 days from the publication of the award.
Necessarily, the Labour Court becomes functus officio only after 30 days of the expiry of the date of the publication of the award.
In this case, 30 days expired on 5th July, 1986, whereas the application for setting aside the award was filed on 4th July, 1988, about two years thereafter.
The labour Court had lost jurisdiction to entertain the application and the impugned order passed on the basis of that application is without jurisdiction.
On this ground also, the order of the Labour Court, dated 6th November, 1989 deserves to be set aside.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed and the order of the Labour Court, setting aside the award, is hereby quashed.
However, we make no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.