Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - This order will dispose of CWP Nos. 4417, 4418, 3564 and 1904 of 1990 and 3246 of 1989 involving common question of law and facts.
For the purpose of order, facts have been taken up from C.W.P.
No. 4417 of 1990.
2.
In this writ petition filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India the petitioner has prayed for quashing of order dated 20121989, copy Annexure P-1 to the writ petition, vide which Labour Court-respondent No. 1, on an application moved by Charanjit Singh, workman had impleaded the Managing Director of PRTC, Chandigarh, as a party.
Demand notice was served on the management.
The management filed written statement and a preliminary objection was raised that the reference was incompetent for non-joinder of necessary parties and that it is liable to be dismissed on this short ground.
After this preliminary objection was raised, the workman moved application for impleading Managing Director as a party.
The plea was allowed and the Managing Director of PRTC was impleaded as a party to the dispute.
The impugned order dated 20121989 vide which the Managing Director was allowed to be impleaded as a party, has been challenged solely on the ground that there is no provision under the Industrial Disputes Act under which a party can be added of the dispute.
3.
It was urged at the Bar that the Managing Director during the conciliation proceedings or prior to the reference of the dispute by the Government to the Labour Court cannot be impleased as a party as there is no provision under which the Labour Court had the power to implead a party to the dispute.
4.
I have considered the submissions of the learned Counsel for the parties.
5.
The sole question which requires consideration is whether a party can be added by the Labour Court.
Section 11(3) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter called 'the Act') inter alia prescribers that the Tribunal shall have the same powers as are vested in a Civil Court under the Code of Civil Procedure when trying a suit in respect of the matters specified in clauses (a) to (d) and there is no other Section which confers such a power on the Tribunal.
In my view, sub-clause (b) of Sub-section 3 of Section 18 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, empowers the Labour Court or a Tribunal to summon any party to appear in the proceedings as it deems fit.
For facility of reference, Sub-section (3) of Section 18 of the Act is reproduced as under :  "18(3) a settlement arrived at in the course of conciliation proceedings under this Act; 19 (or an arbitration award in a case where a notification has been issued under sub-section (3-A) if Section (10-A) or 20 (an award of a Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal) which has become enforceable) shall be binding on;  a) all parties to the Industrial Dispute; b) all other parties summoned to appear in the proceedings as parties to the dispute, unless the Board 19 (arbitrator), 22 (Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal, as the case may be), records the opinion that they were so summoned without proper cause; c) where a party referred to in clause "a" or clause "b" is an employer, his heirs, successors or assigns in respect of the establishment to which the dispute relates; d) where a party referred to in clause "a" or clause "b" is composed of workmen, all persons who were employed in the establishment or part of the establishment, as the case may be to which the dispute and all persons who subsequently become employed in that establishment or part."
The Industrial Tribunal while dealing with an industrial dispute, came to the conclusion that persons other than those mentioned as parties to the industrial dispute were necessary for a valid determination of the said dispute, it has the power to summon them and if such persons were summoned to appear in the proceedings, the award that the Industrial Tribunal may ultimately pronounce would be binding on them.
The aforesaid principle was laid down by the Supreme Court in Hochtief Gammon v. Industrial Tribunal, Bhubaneswar, Orissa and others, A.I.R. 1964 Supreme Court 1746.
6.
It is well settled principle of law that the Labour Court cannot travel beyond the reference but if it is of the opinion that the persons other than those mentioned as parties to the dispute were necessary for a valid determination of the dispute, it has the power to add them as a party.
If the Labour Court is of the view that some persons were not joined as party, it may make an order in that behalf keeping in view the provisions contained in sub-section 3 of the Section 18 of the Act.
7.
The plea raised by the petitioner is of highly hypertechnical nature, which, in my opinion, is without any substance and is liable to be ignored.
More so, addition of Managing Director of PRTC as a party is not going to enlarge materially the scope of reference as the petitioner Corporation was a necessary party for valid determination of the dispute for which the reference was made by the Government to the Labour Court.
For the foregoing reasons, I do not find any merit in either of the writ petitions and dismiss the same with no order as to costs.
Petitions dismissed.