VK Jhanji, J - Briefly stated the facts of this case are that petitioner Faqir Singh was employed as a conductor with Punjab Roadways, Ludhiana, since 1975.
On 2331981, when he was on duty on bus No. 6326, route No. 22, from Ludhiana to Delhi, a party of the checking staff checking the bus and found that he had not correctly punched some tickets.
The checking staff was also told by the passengers that the conductor had received fare from nine passengers at the rate of Rs. 175 per passenger but had not issued tickets.
On the basis of this, the conductor was suspended and a regular departmental enquiry was conducted.
The enquiry officer exonerated the petitioner from the charge and in the concluding para of his report held as under :-  "The checking staff had levelled allegations of punching the tickets at the time of seeing the Inspecting Staff in regard to 9 passengers.
The allegation levelled by the Checking Staff of punching the tickets at the site of the Inspecting Staff does not seem to be correct as at the time there were 80 passengers in the bus and it takes some time to issue the tickets by proceeding ahead in the bus.
All other passengers had already been issued tickets, which is possible that because of rush the conductor was still to issue tickets to nine passengers and on reaching the checking staff the conductor due to haste might have punched the ticket in hurry and may be in the process might have put a wrong punch.
So far as the charge concerning the fraud of Rs. 1575 is concerned, there does not seem to be any such intention on the part of the conductor.
The episode happened because the bus was heavily overloaded, and the conductor could not issue the tickets to the passengers because of this reason, though the conductor should have stopped the bus well behind the stage and should have moved the bus after issuing the tickets to all the passengers and should have given these instructions to the driver.
In view of the abovesaid facts, I exonerate Shri Faqir Singh Conductor No. 195 of the charges of the alleged fraud of Rs. 1575 as nothing is proved against him."
However, the Punishing Authority did not agree with the report of the Enquiry Officer and found the Conductor guilty of the charge and notice for his removal from service was directed to be issued to him.
Consequently, services of the petitioner were terminated on 29.9.1981.
He applied for making a reference to the Labour Court and on 791982, a reference was made to the Labour Court under Section 10(1) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
The petitioner contended before the Labour Court that the disciplinary authority has not given any reason for not accepting the report of the Enquiry Officer.
Once the Enquiry Officer had exonerated the petitioner of all the charges, then it was incumbent upon the disciplinary authority to give reasons for not accepting the report of the Enquiry Officer.
However, the Labour Court ordered that the petitioner shall be reinstated but his past service shall be forfeited and he shall not be paid back wages.
The punishment of forfeiture of his past service and back wages was awarded mainly on the ground that the conductor had punched the tickets wrongly.
The petitioner has come to this Court challenging the Award of the Labour Court, Annexure P-3 whereby his past service has been forfeited and back wages have been denied to him.
2.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length.
3.
Mr. JC Verma, Senior Advocate, learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that once the disciplinary authority disagreed with the report of the Enquiry Officer it was incumbent upon him to give reasons for not accepting the report of the Enquiry Officer.
The Enquiry Officer in his report had completely exonerated the petitioner on the ground that at the time when the checking staff reached the bus, it was overloaded and in haste there is a possibility of wrong punching of the tickets.
So far as the charge regarding embezzlement of Rs. 1575 is concerned, there was no intention on the part of the Conductor to embezzle the said amount because it happened at a time when the bus was heavily overloaded and possibly the Conductor could not issue the tickets to the passengers.
4. the learned counsel for the respondent has, however, submitted that it was a misconduct on the part of the Conductor not to punch the tickets correctly and not to issue tickets after accepting fare for the same.
He has further argued that once the punishment has been awarded by the Labour Court, this Court should not interfere under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
5.
I find that the Labour Court, though has noted the arguments of the petitioners, yet has not given any reason for not accepting the report of the Enquiry Officer who had the opportunity to give the report after the entire evidence was led before him.
The Labour Court has awarded punishment mainly on the ground that the Conductor had punched the tickets wrongly.
This reasoning of the Labour Court is absolutely unjustified as the Enquiry Officer has held in his report that the wrong punching of the tickets was because of the overloading of the bus and it was humanly impossible for the petitioner to punch the ticket correctly.
The Labour Court failed to give a positive finding with regard to the misconduct of the petitioner and having failed to give such a finding, the Award of the Labour Court dated 2351983, Annexure P-3 cannot be sustained in law and thus the same is modified and the petitioner is entitled to continuity of service and back wages from the date of termination to the date of his reinstatement.
However, he shall not be entitled to any interest on the said amount.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.