VK Bali, J - The State of Punjab is in appeal against the judgment and decree passed by Additional District Judge, Amritsar, vide which suit of the plaintiff-respondent for declaration to the effect that she is still in continuous service of the defendant as a clerk in I Girls Punjab Battalion NCC, Amritsar and as a consequential relief that she is entitled to be paid all the wages, benefits and emoluments, attached to the post w.e.f.
Ist of November, 1981 till payment after setting-aside the judgment dated 22nd December, 1986 passed by Sub-Judge Ist Class, Amritsar, by which the suit of the plaintiff respondent was dismissed.
The plaintiff has also filed cross- objections wherein the claim is for grant of interest at the rate of 12 per cent on the arrears of pay for which she had been held to be entitled to by the first Appellate Court.
2.
The plaintiff, by her suit, sought declaration to the effect that she be held to be in continuous service and the action to the respondent in not permitting her to join the duties on the basis of the resignation alleged to have been submitted by the plaintiff be held to be wholly illegal and without jurisdiction.
The proved facts of the case go to show that plaintiff came in service of defendant in 1966 and was working in Punjab Battalion NCC, Amritsar and vide order dated 15th March, 1981, she was ordered to be transferred to Khalsa College NCC, Amritsar.
Inasmuch as the plaintiff styled the said order of transfer being against relevant rules and passed simply by way of punishment, she in point of time first challenged the said order, by means of declaratory suit in Civil Court at Amritsar and vide Ex. P1 the Sub-Judge on 9th November, 1981 directed the parties to maintain status- quo.
It may be mentioned here that it is an admitted case between the parties that by the time aforesaid order came to be passed, plaintiff had not been relieved from the place from where she was transferred and that the aforesaid order was passed after notice to the opposite party.
The plaintiff submitted her joining report on 10th November, 1981 in Punjab Battalion NCC, Amritsar from where she was transferred and had not been relieved and admittedly the said report was diarised by dealing clerk.
She was not permitted to join the duty.
Thereafter the plaintiff made several attempts to join duty and in that behalf she made various representations seeking permission to join as also to be entitled to pay w.e.f.
1st November, 1981 but she was not permitted to join.
It is after serving notice under Section 80 of the Civil Procedure Code that she filed the instant suit.
The matter was contested by the respondent- Punjab State and the plaintiff was confronted with the resignation said to have been submitted by her on 4th June, 1982 which was stated to have been accepted retrospective on 31st October, 1981.
It is on the basis of the aforesaid resignation having been duly accepted as per the case of the appellant- Punjab State that she was not permitted to join the duty and as per the case of the appellant she is not entitled to any back-wages, etc. With regard to her earlier suit it was mentioned that the same was dismissed by the trial Court and even an appeal carried against the said judgment and decree, fate of the suit remained the same.
On pleadings of the parties, the trial Court framed following issues :-  1.
Whether the plaintiff continues to be on duty since November, 1981 ?
OPP.
2.
If issue No. 1 is proved, whether the plaintiff is entitled to the wages for the period since Nov 1981 ?
OPP.
3.
Whether the plaintiff has resigned from the post of Clerk.
If so, whether the same was accepted ?
OPP.
4.
Whether the suit as framed is not maintainable OPP.
5.
Whether the plaintiff has issued valid notice u/s 80 CPC before filing the suit ?
OPP.
6.
Relief.
As mentioned above, after the resultant trial the suit of the plaintiff was dismissed by Sub-Judge Ist Class, Amritsar, which judgment and decree, on an appeal preferred by plaintiff-respondent was accepted by Additional District Judge, Amritsar.
3.
Mrs. Charu Tuli, AAG, Punjab appearing for the appellant-State vehemently contends that the first Appellate Court clearly erred by holding that resignation submitted by the plaintiff-respondent was not proved to have been signed by her as in any case there could not be any intention on the part of the officers/officials dealing with the matter to forge the resignation on behalf of the plaintiff, particular when no case of mala fide has been made out either against any one in particular or collectively against the persons dealing with the case of the plaintiff.
The alternative contention of the learned counsel for the State is that once there is complete justification for not permitting the plaintiff to attend to her duty after her resignation was accepted, then even if the resignation is to be held in valid on account of some technicalities, the plaintiff is not entitled to any back wages on the principle of 'no work no pay'.
Mr. Mahajan, appearing for the plaintiff- respondent, on the contrary refutes the contentions raised by the counsel for the appellant and contends that once the parties have led evidence with regard to crucial question of the plaintiff having or not having submitted her resignation and the same has been held to have not been submitted by the plaintiff on the basis of overwhelming circumstantial, oral and documentary evidence, then the question of intention of mala fides totally pales into insignificance.
In any case, contends the counsel that even if the resignation is held to have been tendered by the plaintiff there is ample evidence on the record to demonstrate beyond doubt that by various representation made to the petitioner for permitting her to join and for monthly salary resignation even if submitted the same shall be deemed to have been withdrawn prior to its acceptance and in the said circumstances the attitude of the appellant-State not even thereafter to permit the plaintiff-respondent to work against the post and not to pay her the emoluments, would be totally unjustified and arbitrary.
Once it is proved on the record of the case that the plaintiff was not permitted to join duties and was prevented to work against the post on which she was prevented by a deliberate, illegal and unauthorised action of the respondent, the principle of 'no work no pay' would not be attracted and, therefore, she would be entitled to all back wages and that too with interest.
4.
I have heard the learned counsel for parties and am of the considered view that the contention raised by the counsel for appellant are devoid of any merit.
On the crucial question as to whether the plaintiff-respondent had or had not resigned, the first Appellate Court after discussing the entire evidence that has come on the record of the case returned a positive finding of the fact that the alleged resignation was not tendered by the plaintiff- respondent.
To prove that the plaintiff had resigned, the appellant examined one Ajaib Singh, DW1 and Manjit Singh, DW2.
Admittedly, the evidence of Ajaib Singh is of no value.
He did not comment any thing on the resignation of the plaintiff-respondent and he admitted that the resignation letter was never signed by the plaintiff in his presence as also that he could not identify the no signations of the plaintiff.
In so far as the evidence of Manjit Singh is concerned, it is proved on the record of the case that he too admitted in his evidence when he was cross-examined that he had at no given time seen the plaintiff writing or signing even in official routine.
He also admitted in his cross-examination that letter of resignation Ex.D3 did not bear any receipt number nor any entry showing that it has been diarised in the office.
It is interesting to note that when the plaintiff came to the witness box, the letter of resignation was not even put to her and she, was not even confronted with her alleged signatures on the aforesaid letter of resignation.
During the course of appeal, the appellant was permitted to adduce additional evidence and Ajaib Singh was once again examined to prove the noting dated 2nd November 1981, of the Commanding Officer, Amritsar vide which letter of resignation of the plaintiff was forwarded to the Director Public Instructions (Colleges), Punjab, Chandigarh.
The said witness also proved noting Ex.DW 1/2 made by the dealing official in the office of the DPI (Colleges), Punjab.
The aforesaid noting also contains the signatures of one Mrs. Atma Ram, the then DPI (Colleges), Punjab, Chandigarh.
The plaintiff who was given the chance to rebut the evidence led by the appellant-State before the first appellate Court and she availed the said opportunity by examining one Shri R.S.
Bal, Hand-writing Expert as PRW1.
Specimen signature of the plaintiff were taken in Court and were compared with the disputed signatures of Ex. D3.
The opinion of the expert contained in his report, Ex. RAW1/A clearly goes to show that the disputed signatures on Ex.D3 i.e., resignation letter, did not tally with the specimen signatures taken in the court.
The resume of the evidence briefly referred to above would go a long way to show that the appellant did not examine any admissible or reliable evidence to prove that resignation letter, Ex.D3, was either submitted by the plaintiff or the same was signed by her.
On the contrary, the plaintiff by producing expert, who compared the disputed signatures and the admitted signatures that were taken in the Court, knocked out the very basis of the defence put up by appellant-State.
The matter does not rest there for the perusal of the record would further reveal that the resignation letter saw the light of the day for the first time when before the trial Court it was produced at the time of examination of witnesses by the appellant-State.
In the list of reliance, it was not mentioned as one of the documents, which was even likely to be relied upon by the appellant-State.
It was not filed along with the written statement also and even when plaintiff came to depose in the Court as her own witness, it was neither shown to her nor obviously she was confronted with the same.
There is yet another aspect of the case which needs to be noticed.
Admittedly, the plaintiff challenged her order of transfer and on that count a suit was filed on 26th October, 1981.
The trial Judge issued notice to the appellants for 9th November, 1981 and admittedly vide Ex.P1 status-quo was granted to the plaintiff.
Admittedly as well the plaintiff had not been relieved from where she was posted.
Vide Ex-P2, plaintiff submitted a joining report on 10th November, 1981 and even there was stay operating in favour of plaintiff she was not permitted to join the duty.
The plaintiff once again made a representation on 12th November, 1981 vide Ex.P3 but again she was not permitted to join.
It is only on 27th May, 1982 that the aforesaid suit was dismissed by first Appellate Court.
There was no reason whatsoever with the appellant-State so as not to permit the plaintiff to join on her place of posting from where she was transferred till such time stay was operating i.e. upto 27111982.
The resignation is stated to be of 4th June, 1982, which has been accepted w.e.f.
30.10.1981 and admittedly the plaintiff has been making representation after representations both during the pendency of the suit aforesaid as well as thereafter.
Assuming that the plaintiff had resigned although the finding of the trial Court is otherwise and the same is likely to be affirmed, yet the representation of the plaintiff aforesaid would obviously tantamount to withdrawal of the designation and the acceptance of the resignation on 4th June, 1982 w.e.f.
30th October, 1981 i.e. from the retrospective date, was wholly illegal and without jurisdiction.
It is settled law that before acceptance of the resignation, the same can be withdrawn at any time.
It is perhaps with a view to deny the plaintiff her job, the resignation was accepted with retrospective effect.
Under the circumstances of the case aforesaid I find no force in the appeal filed by the State of Punjab.
The findings recorded by the first Appellate Court that the in plaintiff did not resign is affirmed and in any case.
It is held that the plaintiff has had made various It representations from time to time, and such representations have resulted in withdrawal of the resignation, if any, tendered by her prior to the date of acceptance i.e. 461982.
5.
For the reasons aforesaid, the appeal of the State fails and as such is dismissed.
6.
There is no force in the cross-objections of the plaintiff as well.
The first Appellate Court has rightly returned a finding that the plaintiff had not complied with the orders of transfer and the failure of her suit prima facie shows that there was no juriodiction for her not to go to a place to which she was transferred.
In any case, she did not work for all this time and, therefore, she is not entitled to any interest on her back wages.
However, it is made clear that if the arrears of pay are not given to her within a period of 6 months from today, then from the date of decree passed by the first Appellate Court she will be entitled to interest which shall be worked out at the rate of 10 per cent per annum.
Cross objections are also disposed of in the matter indicated above.