GR Majithia, J - The plaintiff/petitioner has come up to this Court in revision against the order of the First Appellate Court reversing on appeal that of the trial judge whereby the defendant/respondents were restrained from transferring the petitioner from his present place of posting till the disposal of the suit.
2.
The facts :-  The plaintiff was working as a Staff Officer in Bank of India, Sector 17, Chandigarh; that he was the General Secretary of the Union of the Bank Officers' Association, North Western Zone and due to this reason, the defendants adopted a stiff attitude towards the plaintiff with a view of harass him on one pretext or the other; that he was dismissed from service because of his Union activities, vide order dated November 26, 1983; that the Chief Labour Commissioner, Government of India, Ministry of Labour, New Delhi referred the industrial dispute to Industrial Tribunal, Chandigarh; that the Tribunal vide its award dated April 9, 1987 quashed the order of dismissal and re instated the plaintiff with full back wages; that the award of the Tribunal was challenged in this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 3184 of 1987 and the same was dismissed on March 11, 1991; that during the pendency of the writ petition, the earlier order by which the operation of the award rendered by the Industrial Tribunal on April 9, 1987 was stayed was modified; that plaintiff challenged the order of his posting at Amritsar principally on the ground that the same was mala fide and it was only, passed because the plaintiff was the General Secretary of the Union; that the plaintiff's wife is in service at Chandigarh.
3.
The defendants denied the allegations and stated that the plaintiff has been posted at Amritsar only on administrative grounds.
4.
The trial judge after going through the entire material came to the conclusion that the petitioner had been transferred and posted at Amritsar principally on the ground that he was a union leader :  5.
The First Appellate Court did not examine the case on the correct legal prospective.
It was principally swayed away by the fact that the policy decision under which it was desired that in a couple case, they should be posted at the same station was not applicable to the instant case.
6.
It is well settled that the discretion exercised by the trial judge in the matter of granting or refusing temporary injunction cannot be interfered with, in appeal, unless very strong, ground is made for interfering with the discretionary order.
In the facts of the instant case, no such ground was made out justifying interference.
The First Appellate Court did not meet with the reasoning of the trial judge while allowing the interim relief to the plaintiff that he should not be transferred from his present place of posting during the pendency of the suit.
The trial court took note of the fact that the plaintiff had been transferred for the reason that he was a union leader.
The learned counsel for the bank referred to some decisions to justify the action of the bank for transferring the plaintiff to Amritsar.
There is no doubt that his Court will not interfere with the administrative orders.
The order of transfer is an administrative order.
But if the employer is actuated by considerations other than public interest, then the court can certainly interfere.
The plaintiff is a protected workman being a Union leader.
He was dismissed from service for his union activities although the bank denied it.
The bank's allegation was that he had embezzled a few hundred rupees of the bank.
The Industrial Tribunal on evidence found that no charge was established against the plaintiff and it set aside the order of dismissal and ordered his reinstatement.
The bank unsuccessfully challenged the order in this Court.
The sequence of events leads to the conclusion that the defendants do not want to retain the plaintiff at Chandigarh principally for the reason that he was a union leader.
May be, in that capacity, he.
may be outspoken; he may be ventilating the grievances of the members of the Union with vehemence; may be, while espousing the cause of the members of the union, he may be at times rough, but this is no ground for transferring him to a remote place.
I am told that the defendant bank has a number of branches in Chandigarh, Panchkula and Mohali.
The plaintiff can be adjusted in any of those branches.
7.
For the reasons stated above, the petition succeeds; the order of the Appellate Court is set aside and that of the trial Court is restored.
Even if during the pendency of the revision petition, the plaintiff has been made to join his duty at Amritsar, the respondent bank is directed to issue fresh orders for his posting in any of its branches at Chandigarh, Mohali or Panchkula.
8.
Nothing said in this order shall be construed as an expression of opinion on the merits of the case.
9.
No order as to costs.
Revision allowed.