KP Bhandari, J - The Haryana Public Service Commission invited applications in the year 1969 for the posts of Assistant Engineers (Civil) in P.W.D.
Public Health Branch.
According to the advertisement for recruitment to the post of Assistant Engineer (Civil) the candidate should possess degree of BE As regards Emergency Commissioned Officers, diploma in Engineering and 5-year service as Emergency Commissioned Officer were considered equivalent qualifications.
The petitioners belong to the category of Emergency Commissioned Officers.
They were selected and appointed as Assistant Engineers in December, 1969.
In 1976, the petitioners were promoted as Executive Engineers under the provisions of Rule 6(b) of the Punjab (Haryana Service of Engineers) Class-I P.W.D.
(Public Health) Rules.
The petitioners represented to the Government for grant of benefit of military service.
The representation of the petitioners was accepted and they were granted benefit of military service.
On the acceptance of representation, the petitioners were granted the following deemed dates of appointment as a result of grant of benefit of military service.
R.K. Dilbaghi SK Mutreja JC Nangia SP Bedi 12.3.65 20.5.65 21.6.65 13.7.65 2.
The petitioners were promoted as Executive Engineers on different dates.
The conditions of service of the petitioners are governed by Haryana Service of Engineers Class.
I P.W.D.
(Public Health) Rules, 1961 (hereinafter referred to as the rules :  Provisions of Rules 6 and 9 of the Haryana Service of Engineers Class-I P.W.D.
(Public Health Branch) Rules, 1961, read as under :  Rule-6 : Qualifications  "No person shall be appointed to the Service unless he :  (a) possesses one of the University Degree or other qualifications prescribed in Appendix B of these rules : Provided that Government may waive this qualification in the case of a particular officer belonging to Class II Service subject to the condition that no person shall be eligible for promotion to the Service unless he holds at least 2 years Diploma/Certificate recognised by the State Board of Technical Education.
(b) in the case of an appointment by promotion from Class II Service, has eight years completed service in Class II and has passed the departmental examination prescribed under rule 15 : Provided that the Government may relax the condition of eight years service in the case of an officer who has completed five years service;  Provided further that such an officer shall earn the first increment as an Executive Engineer on the completion of the service of nine years.
Rule-9 : Promotion within Service :  (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-rules (2) and (3) below members of the Service shall be eligible for promotion to any of the posts in the Service, namely Executive Engineers, Superintending Engineers and Chief Engineers :  Provided that a member of the Service in whose case the qualifications mentioned in clause (a) of rule 6 have been waived, shall not be eligible for promotion to the post of Superintending Engineer or above, till he has acquired the necessary qualification.
Explanation :- Once an officer has been appointed a member of the Service his promotion within it from one rank to another shall be regarded as promotion within the same cadre.
(2) Promotion shall be made by selection on the basis of merit and suitability in all respect and no member of the Service shall have any claim to such promotion as a matter of right on mere seniority.
(3) A member of the Service shall not be eligible for promotion to rank of :- (a) Executive Engineer, unless he has rendered five years service as an Assistant Executive Engineer and has passed the Departmental Examination as provided in Rule 15.
Provided that an officer who has rendered six years or more service as an Assistant Executive Engineer, shall unless he is considered unsuitable for promotion, be given preference for such promotion over an eligible Class II officer;  (b) Superintending Engineer, unless he has rendered seven years service as an Executive Engineer; (c) Chief Engineer, unless he has rendered three years' service as Superintending Engineer : Provided that, if it appears to be necessary to promote an officer in public interest, the Government may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, either generally for a specified period or in any individual case reduce the period specified in clauses (a), (b) and (c) to such extent as it may deem proper."
3.
Promotion to Class I from Class II is regulated by rule 6(b).
The rules for promotion to Class I post from Class II post do not provide that the candidate for promotion should possess degree qualifications.
Thus, according to the aforesaid provisions, the petitioners claim that they were entitled to be promoted as Superintending Engineers and Chief Engineers, on the basis of their seniority in the service.
The Supreme Court in AS Parmar v. State of Haryana, 1984(1) S.L.R.
454, while considering similar provisions of Rules 6(a) and 6(b) of the Punjab Service of Engineers Class I P.W.D.
(Buildings and Roads Branch) Rules, 1960, held that for promotion from Class II to Class I post, it is not necessary that the candidate should hold degree qualifications.
The language of Rules 6(a) and 6(b) of the Punjab Service of Engineers Class I P.W.D.
(Buildings and Roads Branch) Rules, 1960, is substantially similar to the provisions of rules 6(b) and 9 of the Punjab Haryana Service of Engineers) Class-I P.W.D.
Public Health) Rules, 1961.
Vide notification dated 2691986, Annexure P.1, the Governor of Haryana in pursuance of the powers conferred under Article 309 of the Constitution of India, has amended the provisions of rules 6 and 9 of the Punjab Service of Engineers, Class I, P.W.D.
(Public Health) Branch Rules, 1961.
According to the amendment made in rule 9 of the rules, a member of the service who does not possess one of the University degrees or other qualifications prescribed in Appendix B to these rules, shall not be eligible for promotion to the post of Superintending Engineer or above, till he has acquired the requisite qualifications.
This amendment has been given retrospective effect from 261961.
The amendment has been given retrospective effect for the last about 30 years.
The petitioners have challenged the validity of the amended provisions of Rules 6 and 9 on the ground that State has no powers under Article 309 of the Constitution to make rules depriving the petitioners of their vested rights.
The other ground for challenge is that the aforesaid amendment of the rules is arbitrary, unreasonable, capricious and discriminatory and violates the provisions of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
It has also been challenged that the aforesaid amendment alters the conditions of service of the petitioners to their disadvantage without the prior approval of the Central Government as laid down in Section 82 of the Punjab Reorganisation Act.
The petitioners claim that their conditions of service are protected by Section 82 of the Punjab Reorganisation Act.
The State has filed written statement through Shri Dalip Singh, Deputy Secretary to Government Haryana, P.W.D.
Public Health Branch, Chandigarh.
The State has admitted that the representations of the petitioners was accepted and they were given the benefits of military service.
The State in the written statement has admitted that the benefit of military service has been given to the petitioners because they were eligible for the same under the provisions of Punjab Government National Emergency Concession Rules, 1965.
It is admitted that before the amendment Diploma Holder Members of Class II Service were entitled to be promoted to the Class I Service as under the original rules, it was not necessary that the candidate for promotion to Class I should possess degree qualifications.
It is admitted by the State that by virtue of the amendment of the rules with retrospective effect, it is provided that for promotion to the post of Superintending Engineer and above the candidate must possess the degree qualifications.
It is pleaded that the amendment made by the State is valid and constitutional.
The written statement has also been filed by the added respondent Nos. 2 to 4.
The added respondents have taken the stand that the amendment of the rules is valid and constitutional.
4.
It is admitted that the petitioners served during emergency and they have been given benefit of emergency service in pursuance of the provisions of Punjab Government National Emergency Concession Rules, 1965.
Admittedly the petitioners have been given deemed dates of appointment for purposes of seniority as SDOs and Executive Engineers.
5.
It was vehemently contended by the learned counsel for the petitioners that if the benefit of military service has been given to the petitioners then they were entitled to be promoted as S.Es.
it is further contended that the petitioners fulfil the qualifications for promotion as Superintending Engineers according to the original rules 6 and 9 of the aforesaid rules.
It is contended that the amendment made in rules 6 and 9 vide notification Annexure P.1, takes away vested rights of the petitioners to continue as Executive Engineer to which post they were duly promoted.
As a result of retrospective amendment, even the appointment of the petitioner as Executive Engineer will become had in law.
It is further contended that the amendment is so arbitrary that it has been given effect retrospectively for the last about 30 years.
The counsel further submitted that this amendment is clearly violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
The counsel for the petitioners placed reliance on TR Kapur and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1986(4) S.L.R.
155.
The Supreme Court in this case observed as under :-  "More fundamental is the contention that the impugned notification issued by the State Government purporting to amend rule 6(b) with retrospective effect from July 10, 1964 which rendered members of Class II Service who are diploma holders like the petitioners ineligible for promotion to the post of Executive Engineer although they satisfied the condition of eligibility of 8 years' experience in that class of service was unreasonable, arbitrary and irrational and thus offended against Articles 14 and 16(1) of the Constitution."
6.
The language of rule 6(b) which was before the Supreme Court for consideration is pari materia to the rules of the Public Health Branch under consideration.
In the case before the Supreme Court the amendment was made on 2261984 and it was given retrospective effect from 10.7.1964.
The Supreme Court declared the impugned notification, dated 2461984, which was given retrospective effect from 10.7.1964, declaring ultra vires the powers of the State Government.
In State of Gujarat and another v. Ramanlal Keshavlal Soni and others, (1983)2 SCR 287, Chinnappa Reddy, J observed as follows :-  "Now, in 1978 before the Amending Act was passed, thanks to the provisions of the Principle Act of 1961, the ex-municipal employees who had been allocated to the Panchayat Service as Secretaries, Officers and servants of Gram and Nagar Panchayats, had achieved the status of Government servants.
Their status as Government servants could not be extinguished, so long as the posts were not abolished and their services were not terminated in accordance with the provisions of Article 311 of the Constitution.
Nor was it permissible to single them out for differential treatment.
That would offend Article 14 of the Constitution."
The Supreme Court further observed as under :-  "The legislation is pure and simple, self-deceptive, if we may use such an expression with reference to a legislature-made law.
The legislature is undoubtedly competent to legislate with retrospective effect to take away or impair any vested right acquired under existing laws but since the laws are made under a written Constitution, and have to conform to the do's and don'ts of the Constitution neither prospective nor retrospective laws can be made so as to contravene Fundamental Rights.
The law must satisfy the requirements of the Constitution today taking into account the accrued or acquired rights of the parties today.
The law cannot say, twenty years ago the parties had no rights, therefore, the requirements of the Constitution will be satisfied if the law dated back by twenty years.
We are concerned with today's rights and not yesterday's.
A legislature cannot legislate today with reference to a situation that obtained twenty years ago and ignore the march of events and the constitutional rights accrued in the course of the twenty years.
That would be most arbitrary, unreasonable and a negation of history."
The Supreme Court has also further observed as under :-  "Today's equals cannot be made unequals by saying that they were unequal twenty years ago and we will restore that position by making a law today and making it retrospective.
Constitutional rights, constitutional obligations and constitutional consequences cannot be tampered with that way.
A law which is made today would be plainly invalid as offending constitutional provisions in the context of the existing situation cannot become invalid by being made retrospective.
Past virtue (constitutional) cannot be made to wipe out present vice (constitutional) by making retrospective laws.
We are, therefore, firmly of the view that the Gujarat Panchayats (Third Amendment) Act, 1978 is unconstitutional, as it offends Articles 311 and 14 and is arbitrary and unreasonable."
7.
Mr. KK Jagia, counsel for the petitioners has not been able to show how the present case is not covered by the decision of Supreme Court in TR Kapur and others, v. State of Haryana and others, 1986(4) S.L.R.
155 and State of Gujarat and another v. Ramanlal Keshavlal Soni and others, (1983)2 S.C.R. 287.
However, Mr. KK Jagia submitted that the Court should strike down only the retrospective effect of the notification.
It is significant to note that in TR Kapur and others' case (supra) the amendment was declared void in toto by the Supreme Court.
The notification in the present case is substantially the same.
Moreover, the whole object of the amendment is to deprive the ex-emergency commissioned officers of their rights of promotion to which they were entitled according to the aforesaid rules.
The petitioners had become Class I officers way back in the year 1972.
The vested rights of the petitioners cannot be affected.
In any case, the present case is clearly covered by the aforesaid decisions of the Supreme Court.
It is, therefore, difficult to uphold the validity of the aforesaid rule.
The amendment of rules 6 and 9 is plainly arbitrary, unreasonable, capricious and discriminatory and thus violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
8.
After giving the benefit of military service, the petitioners' deemed dates of appointment would be from 12.3.1965 to 30.6.1965.
So, their conditions of service are protected by Section 82 of the Reorganisation Act.
A similar rule in Punjab P.W.D.
Irrigation Branch was declared void by the Supreme Court in TR Kapur's case (supra) because the said rule was amended without the prior approval of the Central Government as required by Rule 82 of the Reorganisation Act.
The present rule also is plainly invalid because admittedly the amendment of the rule has been made without prior approval of the Central Government.
9.
The petitioner on appointment to Class I Service acquired seniority in Class I Service of Haryana P.W.D.
Public Health Branch.
According to the rules, the petitioners were entitled to be promoted to the post of S.Es.
and C.Es.
on the basis of their qualifications.
On appointment to Class I Service important rights accrued to the petitioners within Class I Service.
These vested rights could not be altered without the prior permission of the Central Government under Section 82 of the Reorganisation Act.
So, I am of the opinion that the amendment of rules 6 and 9 with retrospective effect is wholly arbitrary, unreasonable, capricious and discriminatory and therefore, violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
In addition the amendment of rules is also invalid because the same has been issued without the previous approval of the Central Government as laid down in Section 82 of the Punjab Reorganisation Act.
10.
Admittedly, the Government has given the petitioners benefit of military service under the provisions of Punjab Government National Emergency Concession Rules, 1965.
They have been given deemed dates of appointments as Assistant Engineers and Executive Engineers.
In view of the fact that the benefit of military service has been given to the petitioners, they are also entitled to the promotion to higher posts.
After giving them the benefit of military service, the Government cannot deny promotion to the petitioners to the posts of S.Es and C.Es.
11.
Mr. PS Patwalia submitted that the petitioners have rendered military service.
The Punjab Govt. National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965 issued under Article 309 of the Constitution have conferred several benefits on persons who have rendered military service during emergency.
One of the benefits is with regard to qualifications.
He has drawn my attention to the provisions of rule 3(iii) of the aforesaid rule which reads as follows :  "In case a person who has rendered Military Service does not possess the minimum qualification prescribed for any service or post, he shall be deemed to possess these qualifications if the appointing authority certifies that such a person has acquired by experience or otherwise qualifications, equivalent to those prescribed for the service or post."
He further submitted that the petitioners applied in pursuance of the advertisement dated 3011969 according to which the Punjab Government considered 5 years continuous service and distinguished record of ex- commissioned officers and servicemen holding qualification of Diploma in Civil Engineering from a recognised Institute and equivalent to the degree which is the prescribed qualification for recruitment to P.S.E.
Class II P.W.D.
B.
& R, Rules, 1965.
The qualification laid down in the advertisement reads as under :  "ii Public Health Branch :- Degree or one of the other qualifications in Civil Engg.
as specified in Appendix 'B' to the P.S.E.
Class II P.W.D.
(Public Health Branch) Rules, 1966.
Candidates having previous experience in the design, maintenance and construction of the Public Health Engg.
works will be preferred.
2.
Adequate Knowledge of Hindi,  Qualifications for Ex-Emergency Commissioned Officers and Servicemen :-  (i) Diploma in Civil Engg.
from a recognised Institute.
(ii) 5 years continuous service and distinguished record.
(iii) Adequate knowledge of Hindi."
12.
A perusal of the qualifications laid down in the rules clearly shows that for the recruitment of S.D.E.
the normal qualifications prescribed in the rules is BE degree or one of the qualifications Diploma in Civil Engg.
from a recognised Institute as specified in Appendix 'B' P.S.E.
Class II P.W.D.
(Public Health) Branch Rules, 1966.
However, for ex-emergency Commissioned Officers and servicemen the following qualification was considered equivalent :  i) Diploma in Civil Engg.
from a recognised Institute.
ii) 5 years continuous service and distinguished record.
iii) Adequate knowledge of Hindi.
13.
It is evident from the advertisement that for ex-emergency commissioned officers and ex-servicemen, diploma in Civil Engg.
and five years continuous and distinguished record of service was considered equivalent to degree qualification as envisaged by the provisions of rule 3(iii) of the Punjab Govt. National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965.
So as far as petitioners ex-servicemen are concerned they shall be deemed to possess requisite qualifications as contemplated by rule 3(iii).
The vested right conferred of the petitioners under the provisions of rule 3(iii) read with advertisement cannot be taken away.
Moreover, rule 3 (iii) is a special provision which will override general provisions of law.
The provisions of rule 1(3) of these rules as specified provided that these rules applied to all classes of services and posts in connection with the affairs of the State.
Thus, in the light of the aforesaid provisions of the rules and the advertisement, the petitioners ex-servicemen shall be deemed to possess qualification equivalent to the degree qualification.
So, the amendment of the rules discussed above does not in any way touch the rights of emergency released officers for promotion to the post of S.E./C.E.
14.
For the reasons aforesaid, this writ petition is allowed and notification dated 2691986, Annexure P.1, is declared ultra vires of the powers of the State and the respondents are restrained from enforcing the same.
The petitioners would be entitled to promotion to the higher post of S.E.
and all other consequential benefits.
The respondent State is directed to give all benefits to the petitioners within one month.
Petition allowed.