VK Jhanji, J - The petitioner was working as a Conductor with Punjab Roadways, Ludhiana since 1975.
The petitioner was charge-sheeted vide order dated 18111978 on four charges dated 261978, 771978, 27101978 and 28101978.
The following charges were levelled against him :-  (1) That on 2678 you were on duty on Bus No. 1369.
This bus was checked by Sarvshri Jugal Kishore and Raj Kumar, Inspectors near the Police Station Chowk, Laner and during the checking it was found that one lady passenger who boarded the bus from Dhianpur to Gurdaspur, was travelling without ticket and you had deliberately not issued the tickets to her.
During further checking it was found that two passengers travelling from Fatehgarh to Kalanaur and half passenger travelling from Bakhshiwal to Kalanaur were not issued the tickets even though the money had been collected from them.
Thus, you had embezzled an amount of Rs. 4/-.
(2) On 7.7.78 you were on duty on Bus No. 1019.
During the checking it was found that one passenger travelling from Hardo-Chhinna to Gurdaspur was travelling without tickets even though you had collected the fare from him, and thus you had embezzled rupee one.
(3) On 27.10.78 you Mohinder Singh, Conductor No. 166, was on duty on Bus No. 1019.
The checking of the bus was done by S/Shri Mohan Lal and Kashmir Singh, Inspectors at Jhande and during the checking it was found that even passengers travelling from Chalk Sharif to Mullana had been charged 60 paise per passenger but had been issued only 20 paise tickets.
It was further found on checking that two passengers, travelling from Chalk Sharif to Bhagrian, were without tickets but you had charged the fare from them and had not issued the tickets and, thus, in accordance with the report, you had embezzled an amount of Rs. 570.
(4) On 22101978, you were on duty on Bus No. 1019 and during checking it was found that one passenger, a pass-holder was travelling due to your negligence and thus a loss of Rs. 120 had been occurred to the State exchequer.
The charges were denied by the petitioner (hereinafter referred to as the workman).
The Enquiry Officer was appointed to go into the charges and the explanation submitted by the workman to the charges levelled against him.
The Enquiry Officer vide report dated 2.7.1979 exonerated the workman of all the charges except the charge relating to the incident dated 27101978.
The Enquiry Officer found the workman to be negligent in not doing his duties with regard to the incident dated 27101978.
The report was submitted to the punishing authority who was entitled to differ with the report of the Enquiry Officer after recording reasons for such disagreement on the basis of the material on the record.
2.
On receipt of the report from the Enquiry Officer, the punishing authority agreed with the finding of the Enquiry Officer in respect of charge dated 261978 but differed with the findings of the Enquiry Officer pertaining to charges dated 771978 and 27101978.
While recording his disagreement, the punishing authority did not believe the prosecution and defence evidence but relied only on charge-sheet which was served by the department on the workman.
The punishing authority was of the opinion that in case the workman was not guilty why he would have been charge-sheeted and thus he was of the view that penalty of removal from service and forfeiture of the arrears during suspension be imposed on the workman.
A show cause notice dated 16.7.1979 was served on the workman for showing cause as to why the proposed action be not taken against him and he was asked to make representation, if any, within 15 days of the receipt of the said notice.
The punishing authority, after taking into consideration the explanation submitted by the workman, held the workman guilty of the charges levelled against him and ordered his removal from service.
It was further ordered that the workman will not be paid anything more than what has already been paid to him during the suspension period.
3.
The matter was taken to the Labour Court under Section 10(1)(c) of the Industrial Disputes Act (hereinafter referred to as the Act).
The Labour Court vide order dated 2271985 found that the punishing authority had given cogent reasons in support of the charges dated, 27101978 and 771978.
The Labour Court further found that the reasons given by the punishing authority in support of his disagreement with the findings of the Enquiry Officer are based of the evidence which was erroneously rejected by the Enquiry Officer.
The finding of the punishing authority with regard to the charges having been found against the workman was thus accepted by the Labour Court.
While coming to the question of punishment imposed on the workman by the authority, the Labour Court invoked the provisions of Section 11-A of the Act and taking into consideration that the amount involved was only Rs. 670, the imposition of extreme penalty of removal from service was found to be harsh and not justified.
The order of the punishing authority to this extent was set aside by the Labour Court and in its place the Labour Court ordered forfeiture of four increments of the workman with cumulative effect.
The workman was ordered to be reinstated into service but without back wages The workman has come to this Court challenging the Award of the Labour Court to the extent of punishment i.e. stoppage of four increments with cumulative effect and denying of back wages.
4.
Mr. JC Verma, Senior Advocate, learned counsel for the petitioner has vehemently argued that the Labour Court is not justified in affirming the findings of the punishing authority when the entire evidence i.e. prosecution as well as defence has been discarded by the punishing authority to come to an independent decision only on the basis of the charge-sheet.
He also challenged the procedure adopted by the punishing authority like not providing assistance of co-worker to the workman while letting the management to present its case through a Presenting Officer.
5.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties at length, I find that this petition must succeed inasmuch as the Enquiry Officer exonerated the workman of all the charges but found that the workman was negligent in doing his duties with regard to the incident dated 27101978.
As a matter of fact, there was no charge of negligence against the workman in doing his duties on 27101978.
Rather the charge was that he had collected fare from 7 passengers but less tickets were issued to them.
When the report of the Enquiry Officer was submitted to the punishing authority, it was incumbent upon the punishing authority, if it disagrees with the finding of the Enquiry Officer, to record its own finding on such charge, if the evidence on record was sufficient for the purpose.
This is so provided in Rule 9(2) of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 (hereinafter referred to as the Rules) which reads as under :-  "The punishing authority shall, if it disagrees with the findings of the inquiring authority on any article of charge, record its reasons for each disagreement and record its own findings on such charge, if the evidence on record is sufficient for the purpose."
In the present cast when the punishing authority discarded the entire evidence i.e. prosecution as well as defence, there was no material before the punishing authority to come to an independent decision.
He could not base his decision only on the basis of charges levelled against the workman in the charge-sheet served by the department on the workman.
The punishing authority while issuing show cause notice has specifically stated that "I do not believe the prosecution and defence evidence and why should a charge-sheet have been served to the department if there was no fraud and thus the charges stand proved and EO has wrongly held conductor not guilty.
I am provisionally of the view that penalty of removal from service and forfeiture of arrears during suspension be imposed upon you."
6.
While passing order dated 3.9.1979 removing the workman from service and also denying him anything more than what he had already been paid during the suspension period, the punishing authority has mentioned that he has given detailed reasons and appreciated the entire evidence while issuing show cause notice giving reasons of his disagreement with the Enquiry Officer.
A reading of the show cause notice clearly shows that the punishing authority did not rely upon the evidence prosecution as well as defence but it only relied upon the charge-sheet served on the workman.
7.
When the matter was referred to the Labour Court under Section 10(1)(c) of the Act, the Labour Court was competent to reappraise the entire evidence which was led before the Enquiry Officer.
However, the Labour Court also committed an error for holding that the punishing authority has given cogent reasons in support of the charge dated 27101979 and 771978.
As I have already noticed that the reasons given by the punishing authority were based on no evidence, thus the finding of the Labour Court that the punishing authority appreciated the entire evidence while finding the workman guilty of the charges, cannot be sustained in law.
8.
Faced with this situation, learned counsel for the respondent argued that the matter should be remitted to the Labour Court for reconsideration of the entire evidence and for giving a finding as to whether the penalty imposed by the punishing authority was justified in the facts and circumstances of the case.
I am afraid, this submission of the learned counsel for the respondent cannot be accepted.
The matter was referred to the Labour Court under Section 10(1)(c) of the Act for adjudication as far back as 5.11.1980 and the Labour Court passed the order on 2271985.
It would be very harsh to remit the case back to the Labour Court after a period of 11 years.
The Labour Court did not choose to consider the material on the record, rather it placed reliance only on the order of the punishing authority which in turn was again based on no evidence.
As a result of this, the order of the Labour Court dated 2271985 is modified to the extent that the order of the Labour Court ordering forfeiture of four increments with cumulative effect of the workman and denying him back wages is hereby set aside.
The workman shall be entitled to all the benefits including back wages.
However, it is made clear that the workman shall not be entitled to any interest on back wages.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.
Order accordingly.