PN, Nag, J. - The petitioner has filed a writ petition, being C.W.
4114 of 1990, seeking a writ of mandamus to allocate a seat in any one of the Medical Colleges in Delhi/New Delhi or in the King George Medical College, Lucknow and in this writ petition the petitioner has filed the present application, CM 869/91, whereby it has been prayed that the petitioner should be allowed provisional admission in the vacant seat reserved in Medical College in Delhi under the order dated 2211991 passed by this court, during the pendency of the writ petition.
2.
On the basis of all-India competition conducted for admission to MBBS to fill up 15% of the seats in Medical Colleges all over the country the petitioner was shown in the merit list, admittedly at No. 1594.
She was allotted a seat in Medical College, Bangalore, in December, 1990 by the respondents.
However, she was not admitted to that course during the current session, i.e., 1990-91 but has been admitted for the 1991-92 session by Medical College, Bangalore.
However, it appears that many candidates lower in merit to the petitioner have been admitted in other Medical Colleges all over the country in the current session.
3.
During the course of hearing of this application, on 7th March, 1991.
In order to verify this position, respondents were directed to file an affidavit whether any other candidate lower in merit than the petitioner has been allotted seat in current session in any medical college anywhere in India.
In compliance with the order the respondents have filed an affidavit dated 18th March, 1991 wherein paragraph 2 they have explained the position that the allotments were made in August, 1990, December, 1990 and February, 1991 covering upto merit No. 2302 and the petitioner was allotted Bangalore Medical College as it was one of her choices, according to her merit.
Since the allotment is a continuous process, the allotment has been made even after the allotment of seat to the petitioner, upto the rank No. 2302.
Although it has not been stated in the affidavit whether any person lower in merit to the petitioner has been admitted in the current session by any Medical College in the country, but Shir MP Srivastava, Assistant Director General (Medical Education), who is present in court today, states to the court that he has information that some persons lower in merit to the petitioner in fact have been admitted in the current session in some Medical Colleges in the country.
4.
In the face of this, I am of the view that it would be unfair and inequitable if the petitioner is denied a seat in the Medical College in the current session for MBBS course, more particularly when persons lower in merit to the petitioner have been admitted in the said course in the current session.
5.
The next question that arises for consideration is whether the petitioner is entitled to be admitted on 'provisional basis' in MBBS course in the current session in Medical College at Delhi/New Delhi or Lucknow for which she has prayed for in the application.
6.
At this stage, it may be noticed that on 22nd January, 1991, this court had ordered the respondents to keep one seat, if already vacant, reserved till further orders and I am informed by the respondents that one seat is lying vacant a in Lady Hardinge Medical College, New Delhi as per the orders of the court.
7.
Shri MP Srivastava, Assistant Director General (Medical Education) has stated to the court that the respondents would be prepared to re-allot another seat in the current session either in Reva Medical College or Jhansi Medical College or Bikaner Medical College or Gwalior Medical College but the admission ultimately will depend on the rules and regulations of the University and the Academic Council and he cannot take the responsibility of giving her admission in any of the above-mentioned colleges.
He further states that it is not possible for the respondents to allot a seat to the petitioner in Delhi/New Delhi for the reason that the respondents have also received representations from candidates higher in merit to the petitioner for reallocation of seat in Delhi although they have already been allocated and admitted in other Medical Colleges in the current session.
8.
This contention of the respondents is wholly unacceptable.
In Amanjit Singh Gill v. Director General of Health Services, 1989-1 SCC 231, the Supreme Court has laid down various guidelines to be followed for the purpose of filling up the vacant seats in the MBBS/BDS course and one of the guidelines, i.e., guideline No. 5, provides that the allocation of MBBS seats already made shall not be disturbed.
It appears that on the basis of the judgment of the Supreme Court mentioned above, the allocations were made by the respondents to various Medical Colleges and to that effect a publication was issued in 'The Hindustan Times' dated 26.12.1990 wherein the respondents have clearly stated that "No correspondence regarding change of college/course and extension of time shall be entertained."
9.
It is admitted case between the parties that the allotment to candidates higher in merit to the petitioner has already been made in the current session in various Medical Colleges all over the country and no case has been brought to my notice where a candidate being felt aggrieved has instituted legal proceedings by way of writ petition or otherwise against such re-allocation.
Some representations have been received from the candidates by the respondents for re-allocation of seats to Medical College in Delhi/New Delhi which, in my opinion, cannot be entertained by the respondents in view of the aforementioned judgment of the Supreme Court and also on the basis of the publication issued by the respondents in 'The Hindustan Times' dated 26.12.1990.
10.
It has been brought to my notice that the current session, in the present case, begins from September-October, 1990 but the last admission has been made in February, 1991 by the respondents.
In these circumstances there is very little scope left now for re-allocation of the seat in Delhi/New Delhi by the respondents as most of the session is already over.
11.
In the aforementioned background and context the allocation of seats already made in various different Medical Colleges cannot be disturbed as most of the current session is already over.
In my opinion prima facie no competing candidate can come into the picture and, therefore, there appears to be no valid objection to the admission of the petitioner against the seat which is lying reserved, under the orders of this court dated 2211991, in MBBS course in the current session provisionally.
Therefore, I am of the opinion that the petitioner is entitled to be admitted provisionally against the seat lying reserved in Lady Hardinge Medical College, New Delhi as per the orders of this court dated 2211991 in MBBS course in the current session and it is ordered accordingly.
This will be subject to the final decision of the writ petition.
12.
The petitioner will report to the Lady Harding Medical College, New Delhi for provisional admission in MBBS course in the current session immediately and I have no doubt in mind that the Medical College will comply with the order expeditiously.
13.
It may be made clear that the seat in Medical College, Bangalore, which was allotted to the petitioner for the session 1991-92 will be deemed to have fallen vacant and the respondents are at liberty to re-allot that seat to other suitable candidate, if any.
Petition allowed.