Ashok Bhan, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was employed as conductor in the Punjab Roadways, Batala.
His services were terminated on 21st January, 1977.
2.
The petitioner served a demand Notice and finally the State of Punjab, referred the Industrial Dispute for adjudication to the Labour Court, Amritsar, vide Notification dated 2791977.
The dispute was as under  "Whether the termination of services of Shri Ranjit Singh Workman is justified and in order ?
If not to what relief/exact amount of compensation is he entitled ?"
3.
On the pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed by the Labour Court:  1.
Whether the domestic enquiry held in this case was fair and proper ?
2.
Whether termination of services of the workman was justified and in order ?
3.
Relief.
4.
Under issue No. 1 the Labour Court came to the conclusion that no fair and proper enquiry was held.
On issue No. 2, the Labour Court recorded a finding that the order of termination was liable to be set aside, as the same was not sustainable in the eye of law.
Consequently, the workman- petitioner was ordered to be reinstated with continuity of service.
5.
While granting the relief of reinstatement with continuity in service, the Labour Court orderer payment of 50 per cent back wages for the unemployment period, on the ground that petitioner has nowhere.
stated in which concern he made efforts for getting service nor he had got his name registered with the employment exchange for getting a job.
The petitioner has come to this Court to challenge this part of the award of the Labour Court.
6.
Learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has argued that ordinarily a workman whose services have been illegally terminated would be entided to have back wages except to the extent that he was gainfully employed during the period of enforced idleness.
For this proposition, he has relied upon a judgment of the Supreme Court in M/s Hindustan Tin Works Pvt Ltd. v. The Employees of M/s Hindustan Tin Works Pvt Ltd., AIR 1979 SC 75 and a Full Beach judgment of this Court in Hari Palace v. The Presiding Officer, 1979 P.L.R.
721, wherein it was held that full back wages were the normal rule and the party objecting to it must establish the circumstances necessitating departure.
Ordinarily a workman whose services have been illegally terminated would be entitled to full back wages except to the extent that he was gainfully employed during the enforced idleness.
Learned counsel appearing for the respondent was unable to show any authority to the contrary.
Following the view taken in the aforementioned judgments, I modify the order of the Labour Court, Amritsar, and order reinstatement of the workman petitioner with continuity in service and full back wages for the unemployed period.
No costs.
Appeal accepted.