MN Rao, J - For the last 15 years teachers in privately managed affiliated colleges have been litigating for their right to continue in service till they attain the age of 60 years.
When the teachers joined the service of colleges managed by private bodies one of the conditions of their service, it appears, was that they should retire on attaining the age of 60 years; certain terminal benefits were provided on such retirement.
For the first time, the State Government issued GOMs.
No. 591, Education dated 28.5.77, in exercise of the powers conferred under Section 35-A of the Andhra University Act, which reads as follows :-  The age of superannuation of the teaching staff in the private affiliated colleges shall be 55 years."
Challenging the legality of the GO, a number of teachers filed writ petitions in this court.
A Division Bench of this Court by judgment dated 15.9.77 in WP No. 1897 of 1976 and batch, allowed the writ petitions holding that the said GO was prospective in its application, only teacher who joined service after the date of the GO, alone would be governed by the condition regarding the age of superannuation.
Thereafter the Government issued GOMs.
No. 1072, Education dated 261176 by which revised scales of pay, as set out in Annexure-I thereof, were made applicable to the teachers of the affiliated Degree and Post Graduate Colleges, whether managed by Government or private agencies, with effect from 1476.
Condition No. (ix) of paragraph 5 of the said GO, laid down :  SUPERANNUATION : For all the teachers in affiliated post-graduate and under-graduate Colleges, the age of superannuation shall be 55 years."
Condition No. (xiii) of the GO, laid down that teachers shall exercise their option for the benefit of the revised pay scales either from 1476 or from the date of next increment in the existing scale within 3 months from the date of issue of the GO, in the form to be communicated separately.
Challenging the legality of the above GO, in so far as it related to condition No. (ix), once again several writ petitions were filed in this Court.
By a judgment dated 24879 in WP No. 2424/79 and batch a learned single judge - Amareswari, J - allowed the writ petitions holding that condition No. (ix) of the said GO, was afflicted with the same legal infirmity as GOMs.
No. 584, Education dated 25576.
The Government preferred writ appeals against the judgment.
A Division Bench of this Court consisting of he Chief Justice and Ramanujulu Naidu, J,by a common judgment dated 7381 disposed of WA 93/80 and batch by which the view taken by the learned single judge was affirmed.
The Division Bench examined the question in detail and held that the application of revised scales of pay to teachers in graduate and post-graduate degree colleges was due to the financial aid granted by the Central Government to the extent of 80 per cent of the expenditure involved.
The Government of India did not prescribe any condition regarding the age of superannuation, but on the other hand, the Government of India in Appendix-IV of their letter dated 21174, addressed to the State Governments, had clearly stated that the age of superannuation for teachers shall be 60 years and that thereafter no further extension of service shall be given.
The Government of Andhra Pradesh appointed a Three-Man-Committee headed by Justice P Jagan Mohan Reddy, former Judge of the Supreme Court and the then Vice Chancellor of Osmania University for the purpose of extending the benefit of revised scales of pay to the University teachers.
The Committee submitted its report on 24876 to the State Government.
One of the recommendations of the Committee was that the age of superannuation of the teachers in affiliated post-graduate and under-graduate colleges should be 55 years.
The State Government accepted the recommendations of the Committee.
In their reply dated 20976, the State Government informed the Government of India that they accepted the recommendations of the Three-Man-Committee.
After adverting to all these, the Division Bench held :  "It is therefore clear that the factual information of the age of superannuation of the teachers on the relevant date was merely communicated to the Government of India by the State Government.
The Government of India did not affix its seal of approval to the modifications of its conditions suggested by the State Government in their letter dated 20976.
On the contrary the Government of India in their letter dated 1.11.76 made some preliminary comments and suggested mutual discussion of the various matters in some detail.
It, therefore, emerges that the State Government neither protested against the age of superannuation of the teachers fixed by the Government of India set out in Appendix-IV of their letter dated 21174 while offering their assistance for implementation of the revised pay scales in the State, nor received the assistance subject to the impugned condition in GOMs.
No.
1072."
In that view of the Division Bench had categorically rejected the contention advanced by the learned Government Pleader that as a condition to the application of the revised scales of pay, the teachers working in the private aided colleges were asked to retire at the age of 55 years.
When the University Grants Commission had revised the pay scales of University teachers, once again the State Government tried to impose a condition regarding the age of superannuation by GOMs.
No. 520 dated 15.12.88.
The same was questioned by a number of teachers in this Court in WP No. 3578/89 which was allowed by a Division Bench of this Court comprising Jeevan Reddy, J (as he then was) and Syed Shah Mohammed Quadri, J following the judgment of the Division Bench in WA No. 93/80 and batch dated 7381.
2.
From the foregoing, it is clear that the State Government has no power to reduce the age of superannuation in respect of the teachers working in privately managed aided colleges who joined the service before 28.5.77, the date on which GOMs.
No. 591 was issued.
In spite of the above clear legal position which has been reiterated by this Court on more than one occasion, still the State Government issued instructions to private managements calling upon them to retire teachers working in their establishments on their attaining the age of 55 years.
3.
In this batch of writ petitions the petitioners who are teachers of privately aided colleges are seeking a declaration that they are entitled to continue in service till they attain the age of 60 years; that all of them have joined service long before 28.5.77 and the GOMs.
No. 591, Education dated 28.5.77 was issued under the amended Regulation 35-A of the Andhra University Act.
4.
Shri Jogayya Sharma, learned counsel for the petitioners, who advanced leading arguments in this batch of writ petitions contends that by virtue of the judgment of this Court in WA 93/80 and batch dated 7381 the petitioners are entitled to continue in service until they complete the age of sixty years.
5.
Refusing this contention, the learned Government Pleader maintains that when once option was exercised by the teachers agreeing to retire at the age of 58 years to get pension as per the Liberalised Pension Rules, 1961, they have no right at this distance of time to contend, contrary to the option exercised by them, that they should be allowed to continue till they attain the age of 60 years.
6.
I am unable to accept the contention advanced by the learned Government Pleader.
This very same contention was advanced before the Division Bench in WA 93/80 and batch and after elaborately dealing with that contention, the Division Bench rejected the same.
7.
The learned Government Pleader alternatively relied upon another Bench judgment of this Court in WA 191/90 dated 6890 which arose out of a judgment dated 30190 in WP No. 8079/89.
Certain members of the teaching staff working in Osmania College, Kurnool who were superannuated on attaining the age of 55 years filed writ petition No. 8079/89 in this court contending that they are entitled to continue up to 60 years and sought reinstatement.
At the interlocutory stage they gave an undertaking before this Court that they were willing to retire on attaining the age of 58 years and receive pension under the Liberalised Pension Rules, 1961.
After giving the undertaking they tried to resile from it by filing another writ petition which resulted in WA No. 191/90.
A Division Bench of this Court comprising M. Jagannadha Rao, J and A. Venkatarami Reddy, J held that, having regard to the fact that the teachers had given solemn undertaking before this Court agreeing to retire on attaining the age of 55 years, they have no right to question that they are entitled to continue in service till they attain the age of 60 years.
That judgment, therefore, is not an authority for the proposition that teachers working in privately managed aided colleges have no right to continue beyond the age of 58 years.
In this context it must also be said that the Government issued GOMs.
No. 472, Education (J), dated 19582 by which teachers were asked to exercise their option to retire at 58 years on condition of receiving pension under the Liberalised Pension Rules, 1961.
This GO, was struck down by a learned single Judge of this Court - K Rama Swamy, J(as he then was) - In WP No. 5834/82 dated 2487.
The Division Bench in WA No. 191/90 while adverting to that fact has not stated that the GO, has revived.
The only observation the Division Bench made while referring to the judgment in WP 5834/82 is that :  "The appellant herein was not a party to the said writ petition."
From this observation it is difficult to draw the inference that the Division Bench has sustained the legality of GOMs.
No. 472, dated 19582.
8.
The present action to retire the teachers was taken under GOMs.
No. 36, Education (J) Department, dated 19185.
The operative portion of it reads :  "Government have decided that the age of superannuation of the teaching staff working in private aided colleges shall be enhanced from 55 years to 58 years on par with the Government employees as ordered in the Ordinance second above."
The learned Government Pleader contends that as the order clearly says that the teaching staff working in private aided colleges are placed on par with the Government employees, they have no right to continue till they attain the age of 60 years.
If this contention has to be accepted, its logical conclusion must be that the teachers in private aided colleges should be paid pension on par with other teachers working in Government institutions.
It must be noted in this context that the teachers working in Government colleges are governed by the Pension Rules of 1985 under which every Government employee who works for a period of 33 years is entitled to get half of the last pay drawn as monthly pension.
The question whether the petitioners are entitled to such a pension need not be gone into in this writ petition since it was not raised.
I, therefore, leave this question open.
It is not the contention of the Government Pleader that the present petitioners would be paid pension on par with lecturers working in Government Colleges, and so, this question cannot be gone into in this batch of writ petitions.
9.
The learned Government Pleader relying upon Rule 19 of the Grant-in-aid Code Rules contends that the petitioners who are to be permitted to continue in service beyond the age of 58 years in the institutions where they are working will not receive grant-in-aid in respect of the posts held by them.
I cannot agree.
Grant-in-aid Code consists of Executive instructions.
When the petitioners are entitled to continue in service until they attain the age of 60 years, the Government cannot withhold grant for the posts held by them.
One important distinction between the petitioners and lecturers working in government colleges as already noticed is that the latter are entitled to receive pension as per 1985 Pension Rules under which they get 50 per cent of the last drawn pay as monthly pension provided they serve for a period of 33 years.
Under the 1961 Liberalised Pension Rules which were made applicable to the petitioners, the maximum Pension fixed is only Rs. 1,000/-.
If the Government extends the benefit of the 1985 Pension Rules to the petitioners by treating them on par with the lecturers working in Government Colleges they should not have any grievance and in fact Mr. Jogayya Sharma says that his clients would be very happy to opt for retirement on attaining the age of 58 years.
But that is not the situation now.
Whether or not the petitioners are entitled to be governed by 1985 Rules is outside the scope of the present writ petition.
Their entitlement to continue up to 60 years is based on the principle laid down by the Division Bench in WA No. 93/80 and batch dated 7381 viz., that the Government of India did not prescribe any condition regarding superannuation at the age of 58 years for teachers working in private aided colleges and the State Government did not impose any such condition while accepting the financial assistance extended by the Government of India in order to confer the benefit of revised pay scales on the teaching staff of private aided colleges.
10.
For the foregoing reasons, the writ petitions are allowed.
The petitioners are entitled to continue till they attain the age of 60 years.
The question as to whether they are governed by the Liberalised Pension Rules of 1961 or the Pension Rules of 1985 is left open.
The petitioners shall be paid salary and other permissible allowances till they attain the age of sixty years.
11.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Advocate's fee Rs. 250/- in each case.
Petition allowed.