Sivaraman Nair, J - Petitioner was an employee in the Andhra Pradesh State Road Transport Corporation.
Employer terminated his services as a result of disciplinary proceedings dt. 241986.
At that time ID No. 264/85 was pending before the Labour Court.
Petitioner was admittedly concerned with that dispute.
Employer terminated his services without complying with section 33(2)(b) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
Employee filed WP No. 4176/86, seeking a declaration that the order of removal passed by the 2nd respondent in proceedings No. Steno/89(1)84-NRML, dt. 241986, against him is illegal, unjust and contrary to law, without jurisdiction and in violation of section 33(2)(b) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
Employer resisted the same and filed counter-affidavit stating that the petitioner had an alternative remedy of filing an application under section 33-A of the Industrial Disputes Act and therefore the Writ Petition could not be entertained.
Respondent defended removal of the petitioner on merits and also submitted that ID 264/85, during the pendency of which petitioner was removed from service, was initiated by the petitioner himself after the commencement of disciplinary proceedings against him and he should not be allowed to take advantage of the pendency of dispute which has by now been terminated.
2.
Our learned brother Ramanujulu Naidu, J who heard the matter adverted to the case of the respondents that the only remedy provided under the Act for contravention of the provisions of Section 33 of the Act, is under Section 33-A of the Act, and referred that question to a Bench, in view of its frequent occurrence and its general importance.
That is how this Writ Petition has now come up before us.
3.
We have no doubt that the ordinary remedy of a workman, who complains of contravention of section 33 of the Industrial Disputes Act (hereinafter referred to as the 'Act') is to file a complaint under section 33-A of the Act, before the Labour Court/Tribunal or National Tribunal, and if such a complaint is filed, the same shall be treated as if it were a dispute referred to or pending before it and adjudicate upon it by the concerned Tribunal/Labour Court or National Tribunal, in accordance with the provisions of the Act.
The Tribunal is also obliged to submit its award to the appropriate Government and all the provisions of the Act shall apply to the proceedings and the award.
It is evident that the remedy provided under section 33-A of the Act is an efficacious alternative remedy, since ordinarily the Section 33-A proceedings should be disposed of expeditiously.
Ordinarily therefore a workman complaining of violation of the provisions of section 33 of the Industrial Disputes Act has to file a complaint under section 33-A of that Act.
4.
Two decisions are placed before us by counsel viz, E.ID Parry's Staff Association v. Deputy Commissioner, Labour-I, Madras, 1985-I LLJ 340 and IDL Chemicals v. State of AP, 1985-II APLJ (SN) 19.
Counsel for the respondent argued on the basis of the first decision that IA-264/85 not being pending now, the alleged contravention of Section 33 of the Act had ceased to be actionable and therefore the petitioner is not entitled to any of the reliefs even from the Industrial Tribunal and muchless from this Court.
Counsel for the petitioner submitted that this court is entitled to grant relief in spite of the provisions of section 33-A of the Act, in view of judgment in IDL Chemicals case.
5.
EID Parry's Staff Association case dealt with the case of violation of the provisions of Section 33(1)(a) of ID Act.
The court observed that if any contravention of the provisions of section 33(1)(a) was brought to the notice of the court, it would be perfectly justified in issuing a writ of mandamus directing the employer to abide by the statutory obligation imposed by those provisions.
The court, however found that since no conciliation proceedings as on that date were pending there was no occasion for issuing a writ directing the enforcement of the statutory mandatory obligation created by section 33(1)(a).
In IDL Chemicals case our learned brother Jagannadha Rao, J, brushed aside an objection based on section 33-A of the Act for the reason that the workmen could not be compelled to work under the altered conditions of services, which involve a clear contravention of law.
In that decision the court did not have occasion to consider the legal position that in a dispute which is pending before it for adjudication, it is competent for the Tribunal/Labour Court to grant interim relief or make an interim award as held by the Supreme Court in Hotel Imperial v. Hotel Workers Union, 1959(2) LLJ 544.
According to us, the decision in IDL Chemicals' case does not support the assumption that the moment a violation of section 33(1)(a) is found, the employee concerned will be entitled to an order of reinstatement as a matter of course.
We are afraid that it is far from the correct legal position.
What section 33-A is directed against is a contravention of section 33 of the Industrial Disputes Act.
In the present case, the employer had violated section 33(2)(b) in the sense that the petitioner was removed from service as a measure of punishment during the pendency of ID 264/85 without paying him wages for one month and without filing an application for approval of the action.
Those were obligations which the statute requires the employer to discharge.
We have adverted to the fact that the services of the petitioner were dispensed with after conducting duly constituted domestic enquiry.
Even in spite of the technical violation or contravention of section 33(2)(b) of the Industrial Disputes Act, it may perhaps be that in at least some cases the employee deserved punishment of merits.
In a complaint under section 33-A by the aggrieved workman which the Tribunal or Labour Court is obliged to treat as a dispute and which should terminate in an award in accordance with the other provisions of the Act, it is open to the employer to show that notwithstanding the contravention, the employee merited the punishment.
This is clear from the decisions of the Supreme Court in Automobile Products of India v. Rukma Bala, 1955(1) LLJ 326, Equitable Coal Company Ltd v. Algu Singh, 1958(1) LLJ 793, Punjab National Bank v. Their Workmen, 1959(2) LLJ 666,C.A.
Rodricks v. Karam Chand Thaper and Bros (P) Ltd 1963(1) LLJ 248 and Hindustan General Electrical Corporation Ltd v. Bishwanath Prasad, 1971(2) LLJ 340.
6.
The assumption that contravention of Section 33(2)(b) automatically entitles a workman to an order of reinstatement as a matter of course cannot therefore be countenanced.
If it is a complaint under section 33-A, the concerned Tribunal will be obliged to treat it as a dispute, thus providing an opportunity for the employer to justify the punishment on merits, in spite of the contravention of section 33(2)(b) of the Act.
That naturally requires recording of evidence.
Ordinarily this court in proceeding under Article 226 of the Constitution of India does not examine witnesses and appreciate evidence as is done by the Industrial Tribunal/Labour Court.
Notwithstanding the contravention of section 33 of the ID Act, it may perhaps be that if there is some justification at least in some cases, the employer may justify its action on merits, if it is possible for the employer to produce sufficient evidence, before the Tribunal/Labour Court.
While upholding the case of the employer about contravention of Section 33 of the Act, the Tribunal may, if the employer seeks such an opportunity, require the employer to produce evidence to justify the punishment on merits.
This is so because the complaint which has to be treated as a dispute, comprehends, not only the contravention but the punishment as well.
That may involve detailed examination and appreciation of evidence which this court cannot ordinarily undertaken in proceeding under Article 226 of the Constitution.
That has to be done by the Tribunal/Labour Court under Section 33-A of the Act.
If in spite of this, more comprehensive remedy, Writ Petitions are to be entertained, it may result in manifest injustice in cases where the workman may really deserve the punishment.
7.
We are, therefore, of the opinion that except in very exceptional circumstances, an employee complaining against punishment of dismissal or discharge inflicted in contravention of the provisions of section 33(2)(b) or alteration of conditions of service in contravention of section 33(1)(a) has to file a complaint under section 33-A and shall not be permitted ordinarily to invoke the extraordinary jurisdiction of this court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
8.
One other submission which counsel for the respondent made, apparently on the basis of some observations in EID Parry's Staff Association case, is that the petitioner cannot have any relief under section 33-A of the Act from the Labour Court, before whom ID 264/85 was pending at the time of his removal.
We do not find the observations contained in the above judgment to indicate an abatement of a complaint merely due to disposal of the main dispute by the Industrial Tribunal.
9.
The question whether a complaint under section 33-A of the Act abates with the disposal of the main dispute was considered by the Supreme Court on a number of occasions.
We need only refer to the decision in Tata Iron and Steel Co Ltd v. Modak, 1965(2) LLJ 128 where the court held that even after the main industrial dispute is finally decided, the question about the validity of the order would still have to be tried.
That applies to applications under section 33(2)(b) as also to complaints under section 33-A of the Act.
It must be more so in the case of the latter because of the statutory mandate that a complaint under section 33-A shall be treated as a dispute and shall terminate only in an award to which all provisions of the Act apply.
10.
The provision of Section 33-A are unmistakably clear that a complaint of contravention of the provisions of section 33 of the Industrial Disputes Act has to be adjudicated upon as a dispute and shall terminate in an award and shall be governed by all the provisions of the Act.
Though the complaint may in one sense be incidental and supplementary to the main dispute, the statute treats it as an independent proceeding in which the Tribunal/Labour Court is obliged to pass a separate award.
If that be that legal position, the fact that ID 264/85 is no longer pending will not disable the workman even now from filing a complaint under section 33-A for contravention of the provisions of Section 33 of the Act.
11.
Counsel for the respondent submitted that the petitioner may not be permitted to assail the order of removal at this distance of time by starting a fresh proceeding under section 33-A of the Act.
We find no substance in the submission because, the provisions in the Industrial Disputes Act or any other relevant statute do not prescribe any period of limitation for filing a complaint under section 33-A.
We also find that there was at least some justification for the petitioner to await disposal of writ-petition before approaching the labour court with a complaint under section 33-A  12.
The result of the above discussion is that it is not possible to grant the petitioner any relief in these proceedings.
True, it is that this court had stayed the order of removal from service and as a result he is continuing in employment under the respondents.
We feel that it is only just and proper that status quo as on today is continued for a responsible period so that the petitioner may make his complaint under section 33-A of the Act against his removal from service.
13.
We dispose of this Writ Petition with a direction that the petitioner may file his complaint under section 33-A against his removal from service by order dated 2486, within a period not exceeding two weeks from today.
The Labour Court shall adjudicate upon the complaint as an Industrial Dispute and pass an award within a period not exceeding six months from the date of receipt of such complaint.
Status quo as on today in relation to the employment of the petitioner shall continue for the above period.
14.
The Writ Petition is accordingly disposed of.
Parties shall suffer their respective costs.
Order accordingly.