AL Bahri, J - Four writ petitions are being disposed of by this judgment.
They can be separated into two groups : CW.P.
No. 2584 of 1987 and CW>P.
No. 9357 of 1990 may be classified in one group and CW.P.
No. 2244 of 1986 and CW.P.
No. 3275 of 1987 in the other group.
Arguments were addressed in CW.P.
No. 2584 of 1987 from which broad facts would be taken into consideration.
2.
The question involved in these writ petitions is concerning the fixation of seniority of Assistant Engineers inter se promoted from Junior Engineers and others who had passed both parts of the necessary examinations known as AMIE against their quota which varied at different times from 5% to 7%.
The service conditions regarding recruitment and fixation of seniority governing the Assistant Engineers and others working in the Haryana State Engineers and others working in the Haryana State Electricity Board are regulated by the Punjab State Electricity Board Service of Engineers (Electricity) Recruitment Regulations, 1965 (as applicable to the Electricity Board in Haryana).
These Regulations were framed under Section 79 of the Electricity Supply Act of 1948 by the Punjab State Electricity Board which were subsequently made applicable to the Haryana State Electricity Board.
Under Regulation No. 3 the service is to comprise of posts as specified in Appendix 'A' attached thereto which also includes the posts of Assistant Engineers (earlier classified as Assistant Engineers II).
There are three methods of recruitment to the post of Assistant Engineers as provided under Regulation No. 6(a), namely, (i) by direct appointment, (ii) by promotion as provided in Regulation No. 9, (iii) by transfer of an officer already in the service of a Government or any other State Electricity Board or an Undertaking of Government.
Qualifications for direct appointment are given in Regulation No. 8.
Appointment by promotion is governed by Regulation No. 9 which provides 7 per cent quota out of the total strength of Assistant Engineers to be filled by Engineers Subordinates who are Bachelor of Engineering or AMIE during the service of the Board.
Qualifications for promotion as Assistant Engineers from other sources by promotion for the remaining quota is also provided under Regulation No. 9.
Regulation No. 11 provides that appointment by promotion shall be made on the basis of merit and suitability in all respects with due regard to seniority and that no officer shall have any claim to promotion as a matter of right on the basis of mere seniority.
Regulation No. 15 deals with the subject of fixation of seniority of the members of the service which is reproduced as under :-  "15.
SENIORITY The Seniority of the member of the Service shall be determined as follows :-  "(1) PRIOR TO CONFIRMATION : The seniority inter se of members of the Service in a particular class of posts viz. Assistant Engineer, Assistant Executive Engineer, Executive Engineers, Superintending Engineers, Additional Chief Engineers and Chief Engineers, shall be determined by the date of their continuous appointment in that class :  Provided firstly, that in the case of members appointed by direct appointment, the order of merit determined by the Board shall not be disturbed so far as the seniority in the class of post to which direct appointment was made is concerned, and persons appointed as a result of an earlier selection shall be senior to those appointed as a result of subsequent selection :  Provided secondly, that in the case of two or more members appointed on the same date, seniority shall be determined as follows :-  (a) In the order of the salaries allowed to them on such date, the higher paid being placed above the lower paid or if both the date of appointment and the salary be the same, in the order of age, the older being placed above the younger, and  (b) In the case of members of the Service appointed as Assistant Engineers and above by promotion according to their relative seniority in the lower class from which they were promoted unless a member of a lower class is promoted earlier than another member of that class who is senior to him and the latter has been passed over on the score of unsuitability or ineligibility for promotion, including refusal to undergo Thermal Training and/or to work in Thermal Plants, unless exempted, in which case the members of the lower class first promoted shall take rank in the higher class, above such other members of the lower class if and when the latter is promoted as Assistant Engineer and/or above : Provided thirdly, that a member of the Service who is appointed as Assistant Engineer by direct appointment shall be senior to all members of the Service appointed as Assistant Engineer by promotion from the subordinate Class who may be appointed to the Service after the appointment of any member by direct appointment in the same batch of selection :  Provided fourthly, that the seniority of a member of the Service appointed by transfer shall be determined by the Board on the merits of each case.
"Provided fifthly, that if a member of the Service is promoted temporarily to a post earlier than his senior, for reasons other than the inefficiency of the senior person or his ineligibility for promotion they will rank inter se according to their relative seniority in the cass from which they were promoted.
(2) AFTER CONFIRMATION : Those who have been confirmed in a class, according to their respective date of confirmation :  Provided that where two or more members are confirmed on the same date, they shall retain the order in which they stood with respect to each other immediately prior to confirmation."
3.
In the meeting of the Board held on December 31, 1976, a decision was taken by the Board which is contained in Annexure P2 and is reproduced as under :-  "The Board in its meeting held on 311276 agreed with the proposal made in the memorandum and decided that promotion to the post of Assistant Engineers against 5% quota reserved from AMIE qualified candidates be made in the manner indicated below :- (a) Subject to the possession of the twin qualifications at the time of the selection the inter se seniority of persons in the promoted rank shall be fixed according to their original seniority in the lower rank.
(b) In case at the time of selection a senior man is passed over on the grounds of lack of qualification and/on his acquisition of these qualifications, he is promoted in a subsequent selection, he shall rank senior to the earlier promoted junior man unless in the meantime the earlier promoted junior man has been confirmed against a post in the promoted rank.
(c) Since promotion against 5% quota reserved for AMIE qualified persons is available not only to Line Superintendent, but is also (been) to other category of staff who pass AMIE examination e.g. SSA, AEM draftsman, Test Inspectors, etc. the inter se seniority of persons drawn from different categories (in both eventualities (a) and (b) above) shall be determined on the basis of the scale of pay in the lower rank."
4.
The aforesaid decision as contained in Annexure P2 was subsequently rescinded by the Board with retrospective effect.
In the meantime some of the persons promoted as Assistant Engineers were given the benefit of the Board's order of 1976.
On rescission of the aforesaid decision those Officers are likely to be affected.
Such officers are petitioners in the first group of the petitions referred to above; namely, Charanjit Singh, Prithvi Singh and others.
They challenge the subsequent order of the Board on different grounds inter alia alleging that vesting rights has accrued to them by promotion which could be taken away by rescission of the earlier order of the Board.
The respondents in the first group of writ petitions as well as petitioners in the second group of writ petitions mentioned above claim that the Board rightly rescinded the earlier decision of 1976 as the same was in violation of the Regulation No. 15 of the Regulations reproduced above in the matter of fixation of seniority.
Thus, they claim fixation of seniority strictly in accordance with Regulation No. 15 reproduced above.
5.
The important question for determination would be as to whether Annexure P2 order of the Board of 1976 and the subsequent order of the Board vide which the same was withdrawn are administrative orders or instructions or they are Regulations framed by the Board under section 79 of the Electricity Supply Act.
A Regulation could only be amended or repealed by framing another Regulation.
By administrative orders or instructions the Regulations could not be amended or repealed.
In this context reference may be made to the decision of the Supreme Court in Shri Bindeshwari Ram v. The State of Bihar and others, 1989(4) S.L.R.
503.
In para 7 of the judgment it was observed as under :-  "It is settled law that the provisions of statutory rules cannot be modified or altered by executive instructions and it is only in the absence of statutory rules that executive instructions have relevance.
As such even if for the sake of argument it may be accepted that on account of the memorandum to the cabinet or any other executive instruction the appellant was to be given seniority as claimed by him, it could not be done as in case of a conflict the statutory provisions contained in this behalf in proviso (iii) of Rule 35 of the Rules shall prevail................" Talwindar Singh Behal v. The Punjab State Electricity Board and others, 1987(1) SLR 450, decided by MM Punchhi, J (as his Lordship then was) fully covers the case in hand.
That was a case relating to Punjab State Electricity Board Service of Engineers (Civil) Regulations, 1976, which prescribed qualifications for appointment as Apprentice Engineers Class II.
Subsequently, by administrative instructions the qualification as sought to be changed which were subjectmatter of consideration.
In para 8 of the judgment it was observed that the rules framed under section 78 of the Act to become operative were required to be published.
There was no provision in the Act for such publication of the regulations.
However, it was observed that such regulations are subordinate regulations having the strength and efficacy of law and they would become operative only if promulgated, published or broad cast in some recognisable way, so that persons affected thereby could acquire knowledge of them with some exercise of due and reasonable diligence.
For this reliance was placed on the decision of the Supreme Court in Sukhdev Singh and others v. Bhagatram Sardar Singh Raghuvanshi and another, 1975(1) S.L.R.
605 (SC).
In this case the Supreme Court observed that the rules and regulations could only be made after reciting the source of power.
It was further observed that administrative instructions only supplement the rules or regulations and cannot supplant them.
The position of law as above emerging from the judicial pronouncements as is, there is no hesitation in holding the orders of the Board Annexure P2 and the subsequent order withdrawing the same as administrative orders or instructions.
The stand taken up by the Board is that the order Annexure P2 only remained in some of the Branches of the Board.
They were not promulgated or circulated.
The only thing which is admitted by them is that some of the officers of the Board were in fact given advantage of the order Annexure P2.
From that it cannot be gathered, in my view, that the order Annexure P2 become a regulation.
6.
It has been argued by Shri PS Patwalia, Advocate, that a vested right had accrued to his clients under the order-Annexure P2 which could not be taken away by ascending the said order with retrospective effect.
In support of this contention reliance was placed on the decision of the Supreme Court in TR Kapur and others v. State of Haryana and others, AIR 1987 Supreme Court 415.
That was a case under the Punjab Service of Engineers Class I Public Works Department (Irrigation Branch) Rules, 1964 (as amended in 1984).
The rules provided educational qualification for appointment to the post.
Subsequently, a notification was issued changing the educational qualifications with retrospective effect.
The said notification was held to be ultra vires.
On going through the judgment, it may be noticed that such a notification was issued by the State Government under Article 309 purporting to amend Rule 6(b) of the Rules.
However, the approval of the Central Government was not obtained as the amendment was to the disadvantage of the members of Class II Service and thus it violated the provision of Section 82(6) of the Punjab Reorganisation Act.
The same was also held violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
The other case referred to on the subject is also of the Supreme Court in The Income-tax Officer, Alleppey v. I.M.C.
Ponnoose and others, A.I.R. 1970 Supreme Court 385.
That was a case of investing Tahsildar with powers of Tax Recovery Officer retrospectively.
It was held that such a power could not be exercised by the delegated authority.
The contention is that rule making power is given to the State whereas Board can frame the regulations under section 79 of the Act.
The board as delegatee could not pass any order retrospectively changing the regulstions.
In my view the contention of Shri Patwalia cannot be accepted.
If initally the Board could not pass order-Annexure P2, its rescission cannot be held be invalid.
It is in this context that it is to be considered as to whether order of the Board Annexure P2 was in any manner violating the Regulations.
If that is so, order-Annexure P2 itself would be invalid and if it is subsequently declared as such, no wrong was committed.
7.
Order Annexure P2 dated December 31, 1976 is obviously contrary to the general principle of fixation of seniority as provided in Regulation No. 15(1).
The general principle as enumerated in Regulation 15(1) is that the seniority inter se of the members of the Service of Assistant Engineers is to be determined by the date of their continuous appointment in that class.
In the order Annexure P2, a different mode of fixation of seniority inter se the promotees to the post of Assistant Engineer as against 5% quota reserved for AMIE qualified candidates was provided in (a), (b), (c) of this order, as reproduced above.
Reading of this order-Annexure P2 shows that sub-paras (a), (b) and (c) were sought to be suggested as provisos to Regulation 15(1).
8.
During arguments, it has been suggested that some of the contents of order-Annexure P2 dated December 31, 1976 are even contrary to the provisos added to the Regulation 15(1), even if (a), (b) and (c) of order-Annexure P2 are taken as provisos to Regulation 15(1).
Sub-para (a) of Annexure P2 which provides for fixation of seniority inter se of the promotees accordingly to the original seniority in the lower rank and is contrary to sub-clause (a) of second proviso of Regulation 15(1) which provides that if two or more members are appointed on the same day, the order of the salary allowed to them on such date would be the basis i.e. the higher paid being placed above the lower paid and if the salaries are equal, the older in age to be placed above the younger.
There is again a conflict between sub-para (b) of order-Annexure P2 and sub-para (b) of second proviso of Regulation 15(1) which provides that if a person lower in the rank was promoted on account of his senior being unsuitable or ineligible will rank higher to the promoted class if his senior is subsequently promoted as an Assistant Engineer, whereas sub-para (b) of order Annexure P2 provides that a senior person in the lower rank having been ignored on account of lack of qualifications and subsequently promoted shall rank senior to the earlier promoted junior man unless in the meantime, the earlier promoted junior man had been confirmed.
Fifth proviso to Regulation 15(1) further provides that if a junior person in the lower rank had been promoted temporarily for reasons other than inefficiency or ineligibility of the senior person in the lower rank, the seniority subsequently to the promoted class would be according to their original seniority in the lower rank.
Sub-para (b) of the order-Annexure P2 provides otherwise that if a senior man was passed over on account of lack of qualifications and on his acquisition of such qualifications when promoted subsequently, he would rank senior to the earlier promoted junior man unless the junior man had been confirmed against the post.
This para is in clear contradiction with the provisions of the provisos added to Regulation 15(1).
Sub-para (c) of order-Annexure P2 is again in contradiction with the provisos added to Regulation 15(1) which provides in the cases of (a) and (b) or order-Annexure P2 person appointed on the same day, their seniority to be fixed on the basis of their scale of pay in the lower rank.
Very cogent reasons were given while rescinding the order-Annexure P2 as to how order-Annexure P2 was to operate harshly against the interest of members of Service.
It would be useful to reproduce the aforesaid reasons recorded in the proceedings, of the proposal of whole-time members, taken in the meeting held on October 18, 1989 which is part of Annexure R21 which was approved by the Board.
(1) The decision dated 21121976 is hereby withdrawn for the following reasons retrospectively i.e. from the date of its issue; (a) That this decision was originally received by the US/Estt.
and not by the U.S./Regulation section and it was never made a part of the regulations so that it has the effect of being executive instructions only.
(b) That the decision does not allow finality of the senior list of A.Es.
at any stage and as a result, the seniority has remained in the constant stated of flux.
On the other hand it has allowed undue accelerated promotion to some inasmuch as more A.Es.
from AMIE channel get seniority than their quota allowed.
It also affected the seniority of A.Es.
recruited from other channels adversely.
(c) That this decision is repugnant to the provisions of Regulation 15(1) of PSEB Service of Engineers (Electrical) Recruitment Regulation, 1965 which existed at that time and those which exist now.
9.
With the enforcement of order-Annexure P2 further complications were going to arise in the matter of fixation of seniority of the promotees as well as the direct recruits.
Under the order-Annexure P2, in the matter of promotion to higher rank a person who earlier was ignored on account of ineligibility or lack of qualifications was to rank as senior to his juniors in the lower rank, who had earlier been promoted on acquisition of such qualifications.
If in the meantime there had been direct appointments, such of the promotees wanted to take advantage of order-Annexure P2 in claiming seniority against the juniors of the lower rank, to become senior in the promoted rank as well as above the direct appointees joining the service prior to them.
This was also one of the reasons for rescinding order-Annexure P2 as mentioned above.
10.
Sh. PS Patwalia, Advocate, appearing on behalf of the petitioner has argued that by appointment to the promoted class of Assistant Engineers, the petitioners had acquired a vested right in the matter of fixation of their seniority under order-Annexure P2 and which could not be taken away retrospectively by passing order-Annexure P2.
At the outset, it may be stated that a vest right is created either by the stature or by the rules or regulations framed thereunder.
No doubt, in the case of some gap/lacuna in the statute, rules or regulations the same could be supplemented by the instructions or administrative orders as required under Article 162 of the Constitution However, when such administrative order or instructions as Annexure P2 has been held to be in contravention of the provisions of the regulations which has the force of law there could be no question of vested rights under such administrative orders or instructions which could be enforced in a Court of law.
Such a matter was considered by a Division Bench of this Court in State of Punjab and Ors v. Mehanga Ram and Ors, 1989(1) Recent Services Judgments 399.
In para 6 of this judgment, it was observed as under :-  "We do not find that the minutes of the meeting held on December 17, 1974 and the communications addressed by the Chief Engineer to the Superintending Engineer are in the nature of executive instructions falling within the ambit of Article 162 of the Constitution and thus no writ of mandamus can be issued to the State.
No right accrues to the writ petitioners to enforce it since the entire case of the writ petitioners hinges upon the alleged policy decision and on the communications addressed by the Chief Engineer to the Superintending Engineers and this having been held by us to be not justifiable, the writ petitioners' case must fail.
They have no right much less legal right for the enforcement of which they can maintain these writ petitions."
11.
Shri Bindeshwari Ram v. The State of Bihar and Ors, 1990(1) S.L.J 82 (SC) was a case under the Bihar Forest Service Rules, 1953 relating to fixation of seniority.
Claim was made to seniority on the basis of Cabinet decision over 10 persons.
It was held that seniority of those 10 persons could not be effected even if there was administrative order of the Cabinet as the same could not supersede statutory rules.
The contention of Sh. Patwalia is, therefore, repelled.
12.
Shri PS Patwalia, learned counsel for the petitioners, has further argued that subsequent decision of four whole-time members of the Board being illegal could not be ratified in the meeting of the Board in which all the members of the Board participated i.e. whole-time members and others.
There is no force in this contention.
Even four members could sit as a Board and take the decisions as their number was within the quorum prescribed under the Regulations.
Even otherwise as per facts stated above four whole time members considered the matter and instead of taking decision by themselves, referred the matter to the Board for approval.
This is how that finally the Board took the decision resicinding order-Annexure P2.
Shri Patwalia placed reliance on the decision of the Supreme Court in The Marathwada University v. Seshrao Balwant Rao Chavan, AIR 1989 Supreme Court 1582.
That was a case where the Vice Chancellor took disciplinary action for removal of the officer of the University.
Subsequently his action was ratified by the University.
Under the resolution of the University power was delegated to the Vice Chancellor to accept or reject the report.
Thus, the Vice Chancellor could not have taken any other action.
He was not authorised to take any action to remove him.
It was observed that the principles of ratification, apparently did not have any application with regard to the exercise of powers conferred under the statutory provisions.
The statutory authority could not travel beyond the power conferred and any action without power has no legal validity.
It is ab initio void and cannot be ratified.
As already observed above, in the present case four whole-time members did not take any final decision.
Rather they referred the matter to the Board for approval of their suggestion which was ultimately done and the order-Annexure P2 was rescinded.
The contention of the counsel for the petitioner is, therefore, repelled.
13-14.
From the discussion of the arguments addressed, the legal position is summarised as under :-  (i) Order-Annexure P2 of 1976 being in clear contravention of the Regulation No. 15 of the Regulations, was illegal and was rightly rescinded with retrospective effect.
Any benefit taken thereunder by some of the officers on getting promotion will not affect the rights of the other officers who were promoted.
(ii) Seniority of the Assistant Engineers inter se the promotees to the extent of their requisite quota of AMIE has to be determined strictly in accordance with Regulation No. 15.
(iii) Regulation 15 is to be so interpreted that there would be harmonious construction.
Normally the seniority is to be fixed according to the continuous appointment on the promoted post.
The Provisos would be made applicable inter se the promotees if practicable i.e. if they do not affect the rights of fixation of seniority of the direct recruits recruited in between.
15.
In CWP No. 2584 of 1987 there are 9 petitioners-Charanjit Singh Nanda and others.
They claim their promotion as Assistant Engineers from a date prior to Assistant Engineers from a date prior to October 1, 1974 on which date Shri Prithvi Singh who was junior to them as Junior Engineer was promoted as Assistant Engineer.
Accordingly they claim fixation of their seniority above Prithvi Singh.
Only the Electricity Board was made respondent.
Subsequently on the application filed, Ream Niwas and AK Talwar were impleaded as respondents.
The petitioners claim benefit of policy decision-Annexure P2 for fixation of their seniority inter se with Prithvi Singh who was promoted on account of having passed AMIE.
The Board's plea has already been noticed above that order-Annexure P2 was rescinded.
The two added respondents took up the stand that instructions-Annexure P2 have already been rescinded.
They along with others were directly recruited as Assistant Engineers at a time when neither Prithvi Singh nor the present petitioners were eligible to be considered for promotion as Assistant Engineers.
Their separate writ petition challenging the promotion of Prithvi Singh was pending.
Thus in this writ petition two questions are raised : (1) regarding fixation of seniority qua the promotees and the direct recruits.
As already observed above such a question is to be decided by implementing Regulation 15(1) aforesaid and their seniority is to be fixed in accordance with their date of appointment/promotion as Assistant Engineers.
The petitioners in the garb of instructions-Annexure P2 cannot claim seniority over direct recruits, (2) The question of promotion and fixation of seniority of Prithvi Singh is being discussed separately.
At this stage, suffice it to say that CWP No. 2584 of 1987 (Charanjit Singh Nanda and others v. HSEB, 1991(2) S.C.T.
250) deserves dismissal.
So ordered.
16.
CWP No. 9357 of 1990 has been filed by Prithvi Singh and five others.
They also claim fixation of seniority in accordance with the aforesaid order of 1976 issued on 411977 and challenge the order of its rescission of 1989.
The Board after rescission of the order wanted to withdraw the benefit given to the petitioners on the basis of above instructions.
As already discussed above, these instructions were contrary to the regulations framed by the Board and if any benefit was given to some of the promotees on the basis of such instructions or orders, the same could be legitimately withdrawn and the seniority of the promotees as well as the direct recruits was to be strictly framed in accordance with Regulation 15(1) and inter se the promotees in accordance with the provision added to Regulation 15(1) if applicable.
This writ petition also thus deserves to be dismissed.
So ordered.
17.
The other two writ petition Nos. 2244 of 1986 and 3275 of 1987 have been filed by the direct recruits i.e. Vijay Kumar Garg and others and Ashwani Kumar Talwar, respectively.
Prithvi Singh is respondent in both the cases.
Challenge is to the promotion of Prithvi Singh and others who were given benefit of these instructions and they pray for quashing of those instructions.
As discussed above, these instructions were illegal and were rightly rescinded.
Neither Prithvi Singh nor other promotees could be given benefit of those instructions as against the direct recruits.
Sometimes promotion is delayed for administrative reasons and when subsequently promotions are made, deemed dates of promotion retrospectively are given.
In this case also dates of promotions were changed and retrospective dates were given.
As far as direct recruitment is concerned the dates of appointment determine the mode of fixation of seniority under Regulation 15, as the dates cannot be fixed retrospectively.
Further question arises as to how promotions are to be made giving retrospective dates for the purposes of fixation of seniority.
That can only be done if there existed a post to be filled by promotion and secondly, the person to be promoted on the relevant date (date being given retrospectively) possessed the requisite qualifications and fulfilled the conditions of eligibility.
It is only inter se the promotees that subject to the availability of the post within their quota that the provisions to Regulation No. 15(1) would be applicable.
If before the date of appointment of the direct recruits there existed some posts to be filled by promotion but promotees were not available for want of fulfilment of conditions of eligibility or qualifications, subsequently on fulfilment of such conditions such persons would not be given retrospective dates of appointment of become seniors to the direct recruits.
18.
While allowing these two writ petition Nos. 2244 of 1986 and 3275 of 1987 a direction is given to the Board to re-fix the seniority of the Assistant Engineers strictly in accordance with Regulation No. 15(1) aforesaid by ignoring the above instructions, as stated above.
19.
The parties are left to bear their own costs in all these cases.
Ordered accordingly.