JV Gupta, CJ.
- This petition is directed against the order of the execution Court dated 2621990 whereby it was held that the decree-holder is entitled for the back salary and other emoluments etc. and at the same time also allowed interest at the rate of 6% per annum thereon.
2.
Plaintiff Ved Parkash filed the suit for declaration that his retrenchment by the defendant-Committee was illegal and, therefore, he continues in service together with the payment of amount that may be found due to the plaintiff after going through the accounts that being rendered by the defendant on account of the pay, dearness allowances, increments, provident fund etc.
The said suit was decreed partially and a decree for declaration that the retrenchment of the plaintiff made by the Municipal Committee is illegal was passed and it was also decreed that the plaintiff continues in service of the defendant.
However, as regards the relief for rendition of accounts and for payment of the amount that may be found due on account of the pay and allowances, the suit was dismissed with the observation that the plaintiff should have claimed a specified amount by way of consequential relief and as he has failed to prove as to what amount is due to him on account of pay and allowances and has not paid Court fee thereon, the said relief is disallowed.
Dissatisfied with the same, both the appeals were dismissed by the learned Senior Sub Judge exercising enhanced appellate powers vide order dated 3151978.
As regards the cross-appeal, it was observed that the plaintiff could not show any law that the rendition of accounts could be claimed against the employee.
He could claim a specific amount of arrears which he has not claimed.
Therefore, the finding on this issue also stands affirmed.
A Regular Second Appeal against the said Judgment and decrees was filed in this Court as R.S.A.
No. 1292 of 1969 on behalf of the Municipal Committee.
In appeal, Cross-objections were not filed on behalf of plaintiff Ved Parkash.
In the said R.S.A., the judgment and decree of the two Courts below were maintained.
3.
Now the decree-holder sought execution of the decree for declaration passed in his favour.
In that execution, objections were filed on behalf of the judgment-debtor-Municipal Committee that since no decree was passed for payment of back wages, the execution application was not maintainable.
The learned executing Court found that the objections are not maintainable and the decree for declaration as such was executable and the decree-holder is entitled for the back salary and other emoluments.
Dissatisfied with the same, the judgment-debtor-Municipal Committee has filed petition in this Court.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the relief for rendition of accounts or for payment of back wages was not granted to the plaintiff in the suit.
Rather the same was declined.
Even in the cross-appeal filed by the plaintiff, the said finding of the trial Court was maintained.
The plaintiff did not file any further appeal nor claimed the said relief in the Regular Second Appeal which was declined by the two courts below.
Thus, argued the learned counsel, in these circumstances, the executing Court could not grant a relief which was specifically declined to the plaintiff in the suit itself.
According to the learned counsel, the executing Court has acted illegally and with material irregularity in the exercise of its jurisdiction.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the declaration as such was executable in view of the Full Bench judgment of this Court reported as Parkash Chand v. SS Grewal, Chief Secretary, Punjab, P.L.R.
1974 Volume 2 Punjab and Haryana 56.
5.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the considered view that the executing Court has acted illegally and with material irregularity in the exercise of its jurisdiction in executing the decree for the relief which has specifically declined in the suit filed by the plaintiff for declaration.
Since the said relief was not allowed in the suit itself, the question of granting the said relief in the execution as such did not arise.
The ratio of the Full Bench in Parkash Chand's case (supra) was not applicable on the facts and circumstances of the present case.
As a matter of fact, the executing Court had no jurisdiction to grant a relief which was specifically declined in the suit itself.
Consequently, this petition succeeds, the impugned order is set aside and the execution application filed by the decree-holder is dismissed.
Petition allowed.