GA Kuchhai, J - The petitioner, 'Handicrafts Promotion Officer' employee of respondent No. 2 seeks a writ of certiorari for quashing the promotion of respondents Nos. 3 to 6 vide Order No. 11/2/63-AD II dated 9111983 and Order No. 3/2/85 Adm III/4435 dated 241986 impugned to the posts of Assistant Directors and a direction to the respondents 1 and 2 to consider him for appointment against a post of Assistant Director lying vacant under the control of respondent.
2.
To appreciate the prayer made in the petition, it is necessary to give facts of the case which appear to have given rise for filing this petition by the petitioner.
3.
In the year 1975, the petitioner appears to have been appointed as Junior Field Officer under the control of Respondent No. 2 after fulfilling the requisite qualification for the post.
However, with effect from 1978 the petitioner felt hostile treatment from the respondents when against the rules and norms maintained by the Deptt., he was shown in seniority list junior at No. 14, though deserving to be listed higher up.
On representation to the higher authorities, his seniority was restored and he was shown at serial No. 11 of seniority list.
The hostile approach of the respondent alleged by the petitioner got against reflected, when the post of Junior Field Officer' held by him carrying the grade of Rs. 550-900 was redesignated as Carpet Training Officer, in reduced grade of Rs. 550-800 treating Carpet Training Officer, Investigators in the department, as feeding cadre to the post of Promotion officers in the grade of Rs. 500-900, thus, clubbing all inferior posts of even Store-Keepers, Accounts Clerks junior to the petitioner, holding the post of Handicrafts Promotion Officer a step to rise to the post of Assistant Directors.
The petitioner got frequently transferred at least six times from 1976 to 1978 thereafter again upto 1984 ten times.
The petitioner though on deputation as 'Handicrafts Promotion Officer' substantively holding the post of Carpet Training Officer being Post-Graduate above the required qualification of a Graduate only.
The respondents 4 and 5 were promoted on 3061980 leaving cut respondent No. 3 who challenged the order of promotion of the said respondents before the court and vide judgment dated 581983 in writ petition No. 34 of 1981, the selection to the post of Assistant Directors were ordered to effected afresh in accordance with the rules on considering all the eligible candidates.
The respondents did not hold the selection of the post of Assistant Director but respondent No. 6 who was even left out earlier in 1980 got promoted on deputation.
Even in the case of one ML Kak, Assistant Director, extension was granted in his deputation term without considering the petitioner who was also eligible to hold the post.
Ultimately the Special Officer vide his letter annexure "C" recommended the filling of two vacant posts of 'Assistant Director' including his adjustment against one of the post.
The petitioner had filed a civil suit also obtaining a direction from the court of Addl.
District Judge, Srinagar, to consider him for promotion which direction was complied to breach only, the petitioner was compelled to withdraw the suit.
The petitioner made representation and was given verbal assurances for promotion by the authorities but short to any results.
The hostile attitude of the respondent got finally exhibited when in September, 1985 two posts of Assistant Directors in Marketing Services Centre on deputation were advertised.
The petitioner was called for interview to be held on 531986 at 1030 AM at New Delhi.
The interview slip dated 1121986 was sent to the petitioner and delivered very late on 331986 at 525 PM indicated as per Annexure 'E' and 'D' though to arrange transport and air passage to Delhi, within a short period of one day was impossible despite that the petitioner wanted to make an attempt to go to Delhi, to appear in interview but was not allowed by his immediate officer as reflected in annexure 'A'.
The petitioner, if allowed to appear in the interview on being relieved he was sure to have been selected due to his higher qualification and experience in the department but due to the hostile attitude of the respondent not relieving him to compete in the interview he was deprived of the right of consideration by the Commission for a higher post on deputation which action is discriminatory and hit by Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
Therefore, this writ petition for quashing appointment of respondent No. 6 and direction to respondent No. 2 to promote or consider him at least for promotion to the post of Assistant Director against one of the posts among two posts lying vacant for which he fulfils all the conditions.
The petitioner has filed rejoinder dated 1791988 and several supplementary affidavits dated 2741989, and 951989 respectively as also rejoinder affidavit to the counter-affidavit of Respondent No. 6 on 1361989 bringing on record office communications indicating the hostile attitude of the respondents towards the petitioner.
4.
The Respondents 1, 2 and 6 have contested the petition and in their counter-affidavit respondents 1 and 2 raised preliminary objection that the case is not maintainable on the ground the same being within the cognizance of Administrative Service Tribunal and for non-joinder of Union Public Service Commission who has made the selection challenged and the petitioner having earlier filed suit on the same subject which was withdrawn.
5.
Further the petitioner has invoked the powers of the court on disputed facts, the promotion of respondents 3 to 5 cannot be challenged by the petitioner who are decidedly senior to him.
As regards respondent No. 5 he has been selected by the Union Public Service Commission when the petitioner did not choose to appear for interview/personal talk and all the appointments made and challenged by the petitioner have been made strictly in accordance with the rules applicable to the employees of the respondent.
6.
The Respondent No. 6 in his separate counter-affidavit denied the averments made by the petitioner.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties.
7.
When the petition was being heard on 20.7.1989 Mr. HI Hussain counsel for the petitioner made an offer to the respondent in these words :-  "the petitioner will be satisfied if he is given notional promotion from the date he was due to be promoted as Assistant Director Handicrafts without disbursement of any emoluments and to consider him for next higher post on the basis of notional promotion alongwith other candidates without disturbing the promotion of respondents challenged in this case."
8.
During the course of hearing, however, learned counsel for the respondents did not press the points on preliminary grounds raised in the counter and discussed above.
He only opposed the petition on the ground that the petition is based on disputed facts and no right of the petitioner is infringed, therefore, no relief will follow in favour of the petitioner short of any infringement of any right.
9.
Mr. Hakim, learned counsel for the petitioner, at the very outset did not challenge the appointment of respondents 3 to 5 not even No. 6 who as per averments made in the petition figures below in the seniority list.
Mr. Hakim, however, in his arguments exploited on seniority list annexure 'A' regarding the filing of the post of Asstt.
Director on deputation to Imphal/Port Blair where respondent No. 6 has been adjusted at Port Blair leaving out the petitioner who is one step higher placed at serial No. 11 in the seniority list.
10.
The petitioner, now in fact challenges the attitude of respondents in not allowing him to compete before the Commission (Union Public Service Commission) against the post of Assistant Director on deputation which resulted in undue appointment of respondent No. 6.
To exhibit his merit and suitability the petitioner has brought on record a letter Annexure 'C' of Special Officer together with Annexure S-III dated 31.10.1986 recommending him for appointment against one of the available vacancies of Assistant Directors.
11.
The petitioner, has indicated the instances exhibiting the displeasure of the respondent, on having resorted to legal course in filing suit and this writ petition for redressal of his grievances.
It is admitted fact that the petitioner in the final seniority list annexure 'A' figures at serial No. 11 and it is not disputed that 'Fida Hussain' respondent No. 6, who figures below the petitioner at No. 12 in the list, has been promoted to the post of Assistant Director, which appears managed affairs and mischief played against the petitioner in not relieving him to appear before the Commission for interview/personal talk.
It is also not disputed that the petitioner was called for interview before the Commission on 531986 at New Delhi, for filling the post of Assistant Director, on deputation, to Imphal and Port Blair but the letter came to be delivered to the petitioner only on 331986 at 525 PM as per annexure 'E'.
Even the petitioner was not relieved by the controlling officer as reflected in letter Annexure E-1 dated 1886 together with another letter Annexure S.III dated 31.10.1986 field with the affidavit by the petitioner on 1121988.
The two letters clearly indicated that call letter for interview for 531986 Annexure 'D' was delivered to the petitioner only on 331986 at Srinagar, to appear at New Delhi, on 531986 making it almost impossible for the petitioner to appear in time but misfortune of the petitioner does not end there as he has not been relieved from the office to take chance for appearing in the interview as per extract of Annexure 'E' in these words :-  "Moreover no reply has so far been received to the Representations made by Shri Tajmaul Hussain HPO with regard to his promotion.
As already intimated the official received his invitation for appearing in interview for the post of Asstt.
Director M & SEC, Imphal/Port Blair very late and as such this office was unable to relieve him for appearing in the said interview."
And Annexure S.III states as under :  "As per orders passed on General Correspondence file GC (10) 83-48 paras 2 and 22 page 4, HPO of this office was not relieved on 3386 by controlling officer but deputed to conduct survey of Mohangam Beerwah area in view of telephonic instructions from Head Quarters Office undersigned received leave application from him on 331986.
Moreover, the leave application has been submitted to Head Office on the same day."
12.
Thus it is established that the petitioner having higher qualification being M.Sc.
and even senior to respondent No. 6, who got himself stepped up to the rank of Assistant Director on deputation to Imphal/Port Blair due to non-participation of the petitioner being not relieved and leaving him to lament for indifferences shown towards him by the respondent.
At the same time the stand of the department regarding competence of the petitioner to hold the post of Assistant Director is contained in letter Annexure C regarding promotion of Assistant Directors by Special Officer of Respondent as per extract of the letter in these words :-  "In the light of what has been stated above, it is requested that proposal may kindly be considered favourable and posts of Assistant Directors ordered to be filled up by the promotion out of the cadre of CTO's who have now attained a good experience in the lines.
Needless to mention that as per the seniority roster issued by the head quarter Office S/Sh Tajamal Hussain are the senior most CTOs may be considered for promotion.
Their work and conduct has remained satisfactory during the period they worked under me.
If desired, their ACR's will also be sent separately."
The contents of the letter establish that the petitioner is not only qualified for the post of Assistant Director but competent too in addition to the seniority admitted by the respondents.
13.
Now looking to the dark side developed against the petitioner to put a block to him to rise in service appear based on written communication of respondent against the petitioner from time to time, which find their source from the litigation by the petitioner against the Department before the civil Court.
It is the grievance of the respondent that the petitioner having filed a suit before the civil Court which was withdrawn and subsequently this petition was filed.
The annoyance of the respondent due to litigation of the petitioner is exhibited in Annexure S. IV filed with the Supplementary affidavit dated 2741989 in these words :-  "To  Sh. Tajamul Hussain  HPO, M&SEC-Srinagar,  Sir, Kindly refer your application Dated 31.10.88.
I am directed to intimate that call letter was not issued to you on 7.9.88, and (promotion stopped) as you are in litigation with the Deptt.
since 1984.
Also refer letter of AD (Mktg.)
Srinagar Dt. 17687 and Budge sanction orders Dt. 14384 and 26385.
Yours faithfully,  Sd/-  LDC  M & SEC, Srinagar."
Then another office letter dated 17687 Annexure P-I to the petition runs in these words :-  "Tajamul Hussain  HPO M&SEC - Srinagar,  Refer your application dated 15.5.87 addressed to DD (IF) What I can do in this regard.
You filed a suit in the year 1984 with the result, Higher Officers became furious and discontinued the two vacant posts of AD's (A&C) in Feb 85 and later on in the year 1986, Mr. Fida Hussain CTO junior to you was appointed as Assistant Director (H).
Appointment to the post of AD (H) was made on the basis of ACR's/seniority as confirmed from headquarter office.
Further Higher authorities are not in favour of appointing/promotion you as Assistant Director.
Moreover the manufacturers survey should be completed immediately latest by 12887.
Sd/-  Assistant Director (Mkt.)
Govt. of India  Ministry of Commerce'  14.
Now to examine the case of the petitioner as per official record indicated and relevant portions of the annexures quoted, it is clear that the petitioner having been found qualified for the post of Assistant Director Handicrafts was denied opportunity by the respondent-Authorities to compete for the post of Assistant Director on deputation, which he has been carving, in addition to the recommendation of 'Special Officer' in his favour, discussed above.
This is the bright side of his service but due to the hostile attitude of the respondents against the petitioner in having delivered the interview slip at a late stage on 331986 at 525 PM to appear at New Delhi on 531986.
Further not relieving the petitioner even at a short notice for interview and in not accepting the recommendation of the Special Officer for his promotion, in not complying the court decision at the instance of respondent No. 2 dated 581983 in writ petition No. 34 of 1981 for filing the post of Assistant Director by selection of eligible incumbents, but for the annoyance caused due to litigation of the petitioner with the department, he appears to have been deprived of the promotion chances.
15.
The argument of learned counsel for the respondent and the averment in counter-affidavit that the petition is based on disputed facts cannot be entertained has to be judged from the facts that the petitioner has faced indicated in letters produced, discussed and duly supported by affidavit at every time but respondents have never sought opportunity to rebut the same by any other record nor even original record was produced to discredit, what the petitioner has projected.
Thus, the letters produced and relied by the petitioner for hostile attitude of the respondent towards him have to be given credit for reliance by this court to draw the inference that it is the respondents, who for one or the other reason have clouded the promotion case of the petitioner to the post of Assistant Director (Handicrafts) to which post he is declared by the opposing respondent, Department as qualified.
16.
The Courts in writ jurisdiction refrain to entertain causes based upon the facts unless there is violation of any rule or constitutional mandate but that alone is not the duty of the court to give bottleneck justice to the aggrieved.
The Court is duty bound to see that justice to the aggrieved is done if norms of natural justice demand so, over and above the rules which may not be sufficient to cover the grievance based on facts particularly, when other remedy is not available to the person like in this case.
The petitioner tried to having made representations in the first instance to the concerned department, respondent but with no fruit.
Once the department shut its eyes to look into the representation of the aggrieved employee, the court is bound to open the door, to a disappointed official/officer to express his grievance even to issue command to mighty.
State of heal up the injuries of the employees which he may have received due to one or the other reason during his service carrier for unsatisfactory reasons.
The jurisdiction of the court under Art. 226 of the Constitution of India is not a limited one.
Under the mighty provision, the court is given a very wide power even to probe into the facts to find the fault by the State against its citizen employee, provided such fault or omission direct is indirect of the State or authority under the State infringes or takes away the right of an employee.
17.
It is not the respondents case that the petitioner lacks qualification or is junior to disentitle him from promotion.
Once the respondent No. 6, a junior colleague of the petitioner gets promoted, there is nothing adverse brought on record by the respondent to comoflague the promotion chances of the petitioner, who was entitled to promotion, rather had first preference at the time of selection of respondent No. 6, a junior hand, but the action of the respondent in not relieving him for interview to compete with his junior hand brought the petitioner's future stand still not due to his personal fault.
18.
Looking to the facts, circumstances and considering the communications of the respondent authority discussed, it is not difficult but very easy to assess the conclusion that the respondent authority has silently and indirectly given effect to his annoyance to block the promotion of petitioner, to the post of Assistant Director (Handicrafts) though in certain communication discussed, the adverse attitude could not be even concealed as the intentions of the deptt.
got expressed in writing also.
With this situation the court has to play its part to administer justice towards the petitioner to redress his grievances.
The respondent has amalgamated the two wings under its control i.e. cadre of Assistant Director (Adm. and Coordination Group B) Gazetted under the Carpet Weaving Training Scheme in the pay scale of Rs. 2000-3500 (Revised) with the cadre of Assistant Director (Handicrafts) carrying identical pay scale vide under dated 2261987 in annexure P-II and the posts of Assistant Directors being available subject to requiring time to time financial approval for the same.
It is the duty of the respondent department to set right the wrong and heal the injury to petitioner for the long awaited promotion to the next higher post of Assistant Director.
The petitioner at last as per undisputed seniority maintained by the respondent and having qualification for the post was entitled to promotion from the date respondent No. 6 his junior at number 12 of the seniority list has been promoted, had the things remained smooth and normal towards him at the hands of respondents which right appears to have been denied to him in the circumstances indicated warranting the interference of this court.
Looking to the peculiar facts and situation of this case together with turning deaf ear to the representation of the petitioner by the respondent on the subject, the court in writ jurisdiction is justified to issue a direction once it is established that the right of a person is taken away by factual implication of authority as in this case, promotion chances of petitioner got stopped, a writ of mandamus has to be issued.
I, therefore, while allowing this writ petition, by a writ of Mandamus direct the respondents to give notional promotion to the petitioner against a post of Asst.
Director from the date respondent No. 6 was appointed.
This however, will be without disbursement of pay of the post solely for purposes of maintaining his seniority and promote him to the post of Asstt.
Director as per eligibility and seniority established by the respondent department against any available vacancy under the control of respondent No. 2, even by extending the term of any post existing earlier on the establishment of the respondent .
The result is that the petition is allowed in terms detailed above.
However, despite prolonged litigation, I leave the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.