Arun B Saharya, J - By this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner has prayed that the record of disciplinary proceedings against him may be sent for; that a writ of certiorai be issued to quash the impugned order dated 31st of July 1985 of the General Court Martial convicting him and passing a sentence of his dismissal from service, commuted by the Chief of Army Staff by an order dated 3rd of December 1986 to forfeiture of 8 years of service for the purpose of pension and severe reprimand, and promulgated on 20th of December, 1986; and that a writ of Mandamus be issued directing the respondents to treat the petitioner for the purpose of pay, allowances, seniority and pension etc. as if he was never punished by the impugned orders.
2.
At the outset, it may be mentioned that the petitioner has recently superannuated from service.
For no fault of his, the case could not be disposed of earlier.
Nevertheless, since the result of this petition may have an impact on the computation of pension payable to him, it calls for a decision on merits.
3.
For the purposes of the ensuing discussion, the relevant portion of the Army Organisation may be traced.
The Supreme Command of the Armed Forces (of which the Army is a component) is vested in the President of India.
The Chief of Army Staff (respondent No. 2) is responsible to the President through the Central Government (respondent No. 1) for the command, discipline, and administration etc. of the Army.
The Army Headquarters comprises the Chief of Army Staff administration by, inter alia, the Military Secretary (respondent No. 3) and the Adjutant General (respondent No. 4).
The Army is organized in commands comprising areas and independent sub-areas and independent sub-areas as laid down from time to time by the Central Government.
The higher Commanders of the Army are grouped in the following classes :-  (i) General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, Command (GOC-in-C) (respondent No.5); (ii) Corps Commander; (iii) Divisional Commander-57 Mountain Division in the present case- referred to as the GOC - Div.
(respondent No. 6); (iv) Brigade/Sub-Area Commander.
The GOC-in-C is responsible for the command, discipline, administration etc. of the troops located in his Command.
Within the command, the Corps Commander is responsible for the command, discipline, administration etc. of the troops allotted to his Corps.
Likewise, the GOC-Div.
is responsible for the command, discipline and administration etc. of the troops of his Division.
4.
LT. Gen. K Chiman Singh was the GOC-in-C, of the Eastern Command throughout the relevant period.
The 57th Mountain Division was under his command.
Maj. Gen. YS Tomar was the GOC-Div.
till Maj. Gen. Dagar replaced him in January, 1985.
The Divisional Ordinance Unit (hereinafter referred to as the DOU) as well as 73rd Mountain Briagade (hereinafter referred to as the Brigade) were two of the formations under this Division.
5.
The petitioner took over command of the DOU in May, 1981.
Maj. DS Sandhu was one of the officers working under him.
The petitioner, in his capacity as the Commanding Officer, initiated the Annual Confidential Report (ACR) of Maj. Sandhu for the year 1982-83.
After showing the relevant portion of ACR, he got it singed by Maj. Sandhu and forwarded it to the GOC-Div.
for his endorsement as the Reviewing Officer, who processed it onward to the Officer Commanding, the Army Ordinance Corps, Eastern Command, Calcutta, for his further endorsement.
Since the ACR was adverse and it could prove harmful, as demanded by Maj. Sandhu, an extract of the ACR was supplied to him.
He made a nonstatutory compliant against it.
He alleged that after showing it to him, the petitioner had tampered with the ACR.
On this complaint, two pronged action, one after the other, was taken by the superior military authorities in the manner discussed hereinafter.
6.
The GOC-in-C, Eastern Command took cognizance of the complaint.
In pursuance thereof, the Command Headquarters, by a letter dated 4th of May 1984 (Annexure J), forwarded the ACR Form to the Government Examiner of Questioned Documents (hereinafter referred to as the GEQD) for examination and opinion.
It was stated in that letter that there was reason to suspect that in page 4, para 13 under column 10 certain entries in pen had been tempered with, and that in page 6 of the document, it was suspected that the last line in handwriting in para 27 i.e. "Will do well if he puts service before self" had been written on a letter date than the writing in preceding lines.
Hence, opinion was ought whether the said suspicions were correct or unfounded; and, if there was any tampering with the writing, the difference in terms of time between the original endorsement and the substituted or later added words or numerals.
In response, the GEQD conveyed the opinion :-  "The alignment, spacing size and location of the writing reading "will do well if he puts service before self" vis-a-vis the rest of the body writings and the signatures below the body writings in the red enclosed portion stamped and marked Q5 show inconsistency suggesting that these writings have been added subsequently".
(Annexure K) On the basis of this opinion, Lt. Gen.K Chiman Singh passed the controversial order dated 18th of June 1984 (Annexure E).
The relevant part of that order reads as follows :-  "1.
After perusal of the complaint by Maj. DS Sandhu of 57 Mtn Div, Ord Unit, the reply of the IO Lt. Col. SK Sharma and the report of the Government Examiner of Questioned Documents, Calcutta, I am of the opinion that the IO had tempered with the ACR after communicating it to the Officer.
I have reason to belief that even the last sentence, "Will do well if he puts service before self" has been added after the ACR was shown to the Officer.
2.
In view of the above, I direct that the entire ACR of Maj. DS Sandhu for the year 1982/83 (Covering the period from 01 June to 31 May 83) be set aside."
(Emphasis added).
This order was forwarded by the Command Headquarters, by a letter dated 23rd of June 1984 (Annexure F), to the Divisional Headquarters, with a copy to the Military Secretary's Branch as well as to the Army Headquarters with the following endorsements :-  "1.
A copy of the non-statutory compliant referred in para 1 above along with the orders of GOC-in-C Eastern Command is enclosed.
2.
CTC of the ACR for the year 1982-83 is also enclosed.
Original ACR being retained by this HQ for purpose of disciplinary action.")
Emphasis added) 7.
Thus, it is clear that Lt. Gen. K Chiman Singh, the GOC-in-C had already reached the conclusion that the petitioner had tempered with the ACR after communicating it to Maj. Sandhu.
On the basis of this definite opinion, he proceeded to direct that the entire ACR be set aside.
This was one part of the action taken of the complaint of Maj. Sandhu.
At the same time, as is evident from the second endorsement quoted above, the same authority had also made up its mind to take disciplinary action against the petitioner.
Thus, the second part of the action came into play.
8.
The GOC-Div., by his order dated 25th of August 1984, constituted a Court of Inquiry under Army Rule 177 purportedly to go into the allegations made by Maj. Sandhu, to collect evidence, and to report with regard to the matter.
The officers so assembled held the inquiry.
During the inquiry, at the request of the petitioner, a copy of the GEQD's report dated 29th of May 1984 was shown to him.
In the light of this report, by a letter dated 19th of October 1984 (Annexure M), the petitioner requested, inter alia, that in order to fix the responsibility for the alleged forgery, Maj. Sandhu as well as Maj. Gen. Tomar should also be placed under Army Rule 180 since their character and military reputation was equally under question.
He also requested that these two officers, be produced for cross-examination.
Further, since the Court of Inquiry had been assembled under orders of Maj. Gen. Tomar, the then GOC-Div., the petitioner requested that adequate measures be taken "to change the convening authority to next higher authority" as the ACR had been processed through his hands.
This was followed by a signal dated 21st of October 1984 by which the petitioner requested for an interview with, and also a ruling to be obtained from the Army Commander, before conveying sanction for further legal action.
It was mentioned in this signal: "involvement of convening auth and biased approach apprehended ..................shift convening auth and case be dealt with by independent body outside 57 Mtn Div (.)".
Here, it may be pointed out that at that stage, the petitioner was not aware of the opinion expressed by the GOC-in-C himself in the order dated 18th of June 184.
(A copy of this order was supplied to the petitioner almost at the end of the Court Martial proceedings, in the circumstances that would appear later).
A copy of his request dated 19th of October 1984 was also forwarded to the various higher authorities, including the Central Government.
These requests of the petitioner were ignored.
Eventually, the Court of Inquiry submitted its report on or about 22nd of October 1984.
9.
On 26th of November 1984, in pursuance of report of the Court of Inquiry, the petitioner was removed from command of the DOU and was attached to the Brigade Headquarters, command of Col. MS Gill for the purposes of disciplinary proceedings.
10.
Col. Gill, in his capacity as the petitioner's Commanding Officer (CO) took up the investigation and proceeded with the 'hearing of charge' against him.
Since the petitioner required it the CO recorded the Summary of Evidence under Army Rules 22 and 23 read with Rule 25.
It is alleged that after recording statements of the first five prosecution witnesses, the CO erroneously treated the remaining witnesses as defence witnesses; he did not allow the petitioner to cross-examine any of them, and permitted the petitioner to only put certain questions to them; and that a statement of GEQD dated 20th of December 1984 was received and attached to the proceedings without giving to the petitioner an opportunity to cross-examine the Expert.
In this situation, the petitioner handed in a questionnaire to be answered by the GEQD.
It is further alleged that the answers to the questionnaire, furnished by the GEQD, were attached to the proceedings by the CO after all the evidence had been recorded and the petitioner had been cautioned in terms of Army Rule 23(3).
Ultimately, the CO framed a charge-sheet against the petitioner.
The relevant portion thereof is set out below.
-  "BEING AN OFFICER BEHAVING IN A MANNER UNBECOMING HIS POSITION AND THE CHARACTER EXPECTED OF HIM in that he, at Masimpur, between 10th June 83 and 15th June 83, while Officer Commanding, 57 Mountain Division Ordinance Unit after having initiated the Annual Confidential Report (IAFI-1123 B-I) on IC-26227 Maj. DS Sandhu, then serving in the aforesaid 57 Mountain Division Ordinance Unit, for the year 1982-83 and obtained the signatures of the said officer at paras 16 and 27 thereon, interpolated the words "will do well if he puts service before self" in the pen picture under para 27 surreptitiously erased and altered the original figures in the figurative assessments under the IO's column, in paras 13, 14 and 27 of the said Annual Confidential Reports, by inserting fresh figures......"  11.
Since trial of the charge was contemplated, the GOC-Div.
passed an order dated 10th of May, 1985 convening the GCM.
The Court, so constituted, proceeded with the trial and recorded statements of 13 Prosecution Witnesses and 2 Courts Witnesses.
At that stage, pursuant to a reference made by the Court, a reply received from the GEQD was taken on record.
Thereafter, the Court decided to send the earlier Questioned Documents and the standard writings for further examination and clarification by the Expert.
After receipt of that report, closing address by the defence was submitted.
At the end, on 31st of July 1985, the GCM announced the finding that the petitioner 'is GUILTY of the charge" and the sentence "To be dismissed from service", of course, subject to confirmation.
12.
By a pre-confirmation petition dated 10th of August 1985 (Annexure P), the petitioner sought annulment of the proceedings, inter alia, on the ground of prejudice and bias.
In paragraph 2(a) it was stated :  "The court was conveyed by GOC 57 Mtn Div and Brig PC Puri, VSM, the Presiding Officer of the GCM was a Brigade Cdr under that Division.
The Division functioned directly under HQ Easter Command when the allegation made by Maj. Sandhu of 57 Mtn DCU were being investigated through C of I and S of E. It was directory under HQ Eastern Comd even when the Convening Order for the GCM was issued.
Even before the C of I commenced the issues had been prejudged against me by the GOC, 57 Mtn Div.
This was based on a most unfortunate latter No. 195718/Rep/MS 4 dated 23rd June 84 issued by the GOC-in-C, HQ Eastern Comd in which the said General Officer in person had given his decision that the ACR for 82-83 initiated by me on Maj. Sandhu be set aside, based on his conclusion that it was I who had tampered with Maj. Sandhu's ACR.
A photostat copy of the said letter received under HQ 73 Mtn Bde letter No. 413/SKS/A dated 26 July 85, is at Annexure 1, 2 and 3 to this petition.
The letter at Annexure 3 containing the said decision and order was known to the Division and within the Division even when the C of I was in progress.
The said letter, therefore, worked as a mandate and all investigations like C of I and the S of E ordered by the Div and HQ 73 Bde respectively were decisively influenced by the conclusive nature of the said order to my serve prejudice, so much so that none of the investigating authorities allowed anything to go on record inconsistent with the said conclusive views of the GOC-in-C".
(Emphasis added) The Chief of Army Staff, in his capacity as the Confirming Authority, by the impugned order dated 3rd of December 1986 confirmed finding of the Court but the sentence of dismissal was directed to be "commuted to forfeiture of eight years last service for the purpose of pension and severe reprimand".
The findings and the modified sentence were consequently promulgated.
13.
Promptly, the petitioner sought redressal of his grievance by the present petition.
However, after moving this Court, he also filed a post-confirmation petition dated 19th of September 1987 under Section 164(1) of the Army Act.
But, it was rejected by the Central Government.
14.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has challenged the impugned action primarily on the ground of bias.
He has contended that the gravamen of the charge that the petitioner had tampered with the ACR after communicating it to Maj. Sandhu had been prejudged by Lt. Gen, Chiman Singh by his opinion categorically expressed in the order dated 18th of June 1984.
This opinion and order, having been communicated to the Division Headquarters, was known to the GOC-Div.
as well as to the other authorities within the Division, prior to the assembly of the Court of Inquiry, and well before the initiation of investigation and trial into the charge against the petitioner.
This, according to him, operated as a mandate to all the subordinate authorities to act conformably; and, in any event, the entire proceedings were vitiated as real likelihood of bias, due to the authoritative opinion expressed by the highest military authority of the Eastern Command, cannot be ruled out.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents has tried to defend the action on the proposition that in every uniformed service, there is some degree of 'command influence'; that to prove bias against him, the petitioner must show that the command influence in his case was excessive, not by civilian standards but by Army Standards; and that the petitioner has failed to make good, on that yardstick, a case of bias.
15.
No doubt, in every uniformed service there is some degree of 'command influence'.
This influence in certainly much more pervasive in the armed forces than experienced in the civil services.
The question then is: whether the concept of command influence is at all applicable to a case of disciplinary action, and, if so, to what extent would it be permissible by Army Standards.
The answers undoubtedly emerges from a proper analysis of the relevant provisions made in the Army Act and the Army Rules, specially, the provisions contained in Chapter V and Chapter VI of the Army Rules to regulate investigation of charges and trial by Court Martial, and Courts of Inquiry respectively.
These various provisions prescribe the manner and the method in which persons subject to the Army Act, have to be dealt with in the matter of discipline and punishment.
16.
A perusal of these statutory provisions reveals: when indefinite facts have to be ascertained, it may be done, by a Court of Inquiry under Chapter VI of the Rules; and, when a person subject to the Act is alleged to have committed an offence, investigation of the charge and trial must be conducted in accordance with Chapter V of the Rules.
17.
A Court of Inquiry is constituted when the facts are not clear, to collect evidence, and if so required, to report with regard to the matter referred.
A Court of Inquiry is not obligatory to take disciplinary action against any one.
It is optional.
Such a Court may be assembled, as earlier mentioned, to ascertain facts.
The proceedings of a Court of Inquiry or any statement made or given at a Court of Inquiry are not even admissible in evidence against a person subject to the Act, nor shall any evidence respecting the proceedings of the court be given against any such person except upon the trial of such person for willfully giving false evidence before that court (Rule 182).
18.
When it appears, on given facts, that an offence has been committed by a person subject of the Act, provisions made in Chapter V of the Rules come into play.
In such a case, the CO of the accused shall undertake the investigation.
He shall hear the charge against him, and, in the case of an officer, if he requires it, take down the summary of evidence, which includes recording of statements and cross-examination of witnesses, in the presence of th accused.
At that stage itself, if the CO is of the opinion that the evidence does not show that an offence under the Act has been committed, he may dismiss the charge brought before him.
In such a case, the accused is discharged.
If the CO, however, remands the accused for trial by a Court martial, he may prepare a formal charge-sheet stating the particulars of the alleged offence and apply to the proper military authority to convene a court-martial.
19.
The officer, before convening a general or district court-martial, shall first satisfy himself that the charges to be tried by the court are for offences within the meaning of the Act, and that the evidence justifies a trial on those charges, and if not so satisfied, shall order the release of the accused.
He shall also satisfy himself that the case is a proper one to be tried by the kind of court-martial which he proposes to convene.
The officer convening a general court-martial shall appoint not less than five officers to from the court.
Trial by the court-martial shall then proceed in accordance with rule 41 onwards.
If the accused is found to be guilty, the finding and sentence shall be announced forthwith in open Court, subject to confirmation.
Upon receiving the proceedings of the court-martial, the confirming authority may confirm or refuse confirmation.
The charge, finding and sentence, together with confirmation or non-confirmation of the proceedings shall then be promulgated in such manner as the confirming authority may direct, and if no direction is given, according to the custom of the service.
Thereafter, the accused may present a petition against the finding and sentence to the Central Government or the Chief of Army Staff who may pass such orders thereon as it or he thinks fit.
20.
Thus, under the Army Rules, it is clear that the investigation and trial of an alleged offence ought to be processed from the lower to the higher military authority; and, at each level, the concerned authority is vested with the power to release the accused.
This manner and method has been prescribed to ensure objective, fair, and independent application of mind by various officers, at each level, in the organisation, free of influence or bias of any kind at any stage of the proceedings.
In any event, if a statutory power, especially a disciplinary power, is vested in an authority, it must be exercised, strictly in the prescribed manner, by the specified authority alone.
As a result, it appears that command influence, if any, would be permissible only in administrative matters and not in the exercise of disciplinary powers under the Army Act and the Army Rules.
21.
Now, turning to the facts and circumstances of the present case, the gravamen of the charge against the petitioner was that he had tampered with the ACR after communicating it to Maj. Sandhu.
Lt. Gen. K Chiman Singh expressed a definite opinion on it is his order dated 18th of June 1984.
No doubt, in his administrative capacity as the GOC-in-C, he was well within his powers to set aside the entire ACR.
But, to do so, it was wholly unnecessary for him to express the opinion that the petitioner had tampered with the ACR after communicating it to Maj. Sandhu.
By the expression of this unequivocal opinion, he really pre-emted the investigation and trial of this charge in accordance with law.
Further, it is clear from the endorsements made on the letter dated 23rd of June 1984 that the Headquarters, Eastern Command, headed by Lt. Gen. K Chiman Singh, at the same time, had also taken the decision to initiate "disciplinary action" against the petitioner.
22.
Instead of the CO at the unit level, and then the Convensing Officer, independently and objectively satisfying themselves whether the charge should be proceeded with, the highest military authority in the command, the GOC-in-C, had unequivocally expressed his decisive opinion on the matter.
Thus, in the present case, the process prescribed under the Army Rules was inverted.
In these circumstances, it is hard to brush aside the petitioner's plea that the various officers involved in the proceedings, who were all subordinate to and under the direct military control of Lt. Gen. K Chiman Singh, had not real option but to fall in line with his unquestionable opinion.
Even if it be said that the petitioner has not made out a case of actual basis, there is no escape from the conclusion that the disciplinary proceedings stand vitiated by a real and strong likelihood of bias in this case.
This factor was distinctively raised by the petitioner in his pre-confirmation petition under Section 164 of the Army Act.
Had its implication been properly appreciated, instead of merely commuting the sentence, the Chief of Army Staff ought of have set aside the entire proceedings.
Suitable steps could be adopted, even at that stage, for a fresh prosecution outside the Eastern Command headed by Lt. Gen. K Chiman Singh.
But, this was not done.
23.
In Union of India v. Srinath, I.L.R.
1978(2) Karnataka Jagannatha Shetty, J declared departmental proceedings against Srinath void on the ground of real likelihood of bias, as the disciplinary inquiry, on the basis of which he was ordered to be removed from service, was conducted by one Lt. JS.
Sandhu, whereas in the earlier proceedings of the Court of Inquiry under the Army Rules, which consisted superior officer in the local Military Station, has record their opinion that Srinath was guilty.
The criteria discussed and the conclusion reached in that case apply with full force to the facts and circumstances of the present case.
24.
The other pleas urged by counsel for the petitioner have no merit in them.
In view of the binding on the first point, it is actually not necessary to go any further.
To complete the judgment, however, I proceed to briefly deal with them.
25.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the GCM, as convened, was invalid; because the GOC Div.
was disqualified from convening the Court Martial as he was personally interested in the matter; and because two of the officers, namely, Lt. Col. ND Bandhu and Lt. Col. AK Tyagi were not competent to sit as members of the GCM as they were holding a substantive rank of Major, lower than that of the petitioner.
The first part of the objection has been raised on the erroneous assumption that Maj. Gen. Tomar, who had dealt with the ACR, had convened the Court Matrial.
On it being found from the records that the GCM had been convened in May 1985 under orders of Maj.Gen.
Dargar, who had taken over the GOC-Div.
with effect from January 1985, it was not seriously pressed.
So far as the second part is concerned, a specific question was put to the petitioner right at the commencement of proceedings before the GCM in accordance with Section 130 of the Act read with Army Rule 40(1) an Rule 44, if he had any objection to be tried by any member(s) of the Court.
But, the petitioner did not raise any challenge in respect of the said two officers.
Having submitted to their authority, without any demur, it is not open to the petitioner not to challenge the constitution of the GCM on this ground.
26.
Next, it has been contended that the trial is vitiated as the GCM allowed the prosecution to cross-examine some of its own witnesses without there being any permissible ground for it.
A persual of the GCM file shows that the prosecution sought permission to cross-examine the concerned witnesses, and that the Court, after considering the statements made by them, permitted the prosecution to do so.
Section 154 of the Evidence Act confers a discretion on the Court to permit a person who calls a witness to put any questions to him which might be put in cross-examination by the adverse party.
It is not open to this Court to sit in appeal over the discretion exercised by the GCM in this regard.
27.
Lastly, in has been contended that Army Rule 23 had been breached in recording Summary of Evidence and that the petitioner was denied of a reasonable opportunity to prepare a proper defence as: (1) statements of the last seven prosecution witnesses were mistaken by the CO as defence witnesses, and the same were taken into consideration without permitting the petitioner to cross-examine them; and (2) the answer to the petitioner's questionnaire furnished by GEQD was taken on record by the CO after cautioning the accused under Rule 23(3).
In the present case, the Summary of Evidence was recorded as it was so required by the petitioner in terms of Army Rule 25.
As such, it is not the case of the petitioner that there was non-adherence to this requirement under the Rules.
His grievance is that he was deprived of a reasonable opportunity to prepare a defence because of alleged irregularity in the observance of the procedure under rule 23.
Right at the commencement of proceedings before the Court Martial, Rule 56 requires the Court to ask the accused whether he wishes to apply for an adjournment on the ground that any of the rules relating to procedure before trial has not been complied with and that he had been prejudiced thereby, or on the ground that he has not sufficient opportunity for preparing his defence.
The GCM record shows that the Court did put this question to the accused.
In answer, the petitioner requested for an adjournment for 24 hours only on the ground that he had not been shown till then the original ACR which was the subject matter of the charge.
He did not make any grievance at all that he did not have sufficient opportunity for preparing his defence on the grounds now sought to be urged.
Even otherwise, a perusal of the original record of the GCM proceedings reveals that the said last seven witnesses i.e. PW 6 to P.W. 12, were cross-examined by the defence counsel.
Likewise, PW 2, the expert who had examined the questioned document, was also cross-examined.
By that time the petitioner was fully aware of the answers given by the expert to the petitioner's questionnaire at the earlier stage of recording Summary of Evidence.
As such, requisite opportunity was given to the petitioner for cross-examination of all the witnesses at the time of trial.
28.
In any event, error or irregularity, if any, at the stage of investigation, anterior to trial by the Court Martial, would not vitiate the trial and ultimate conviction of the delinquent.
This proposition, so far as the Court is concerned, is well settled by a Full Bench judgment in Flying Officer S Sundarajan v. Union of India, AIR 1970 Delhi and Ramamurthy Wadhwa v. Union of India, ILR 1976 (II) Delhi 691, after a detailed discussion of the procedure and purpose of recording Summary of Evidence as well as the procedure followed at the trial by Court Martial.
The case of S Sundarajan (supra) was later cited before the Supreme Court in Lt. Col. Prithipal Singh Bedi v. Union of India, AIR 1982 SC 1413.
That was a case of an Army Officer.
In such a case, the provisions of Army Rule 22 and Rule 23 become applicable if the delinquent to requires it.
In fact, the accused did not make a request that the investigation should be done and that the Summary of Evidence should be recorded in his presence.
Therefore, he was precluded from urging that the requirements of Rules 22 and 23 had not been complied with.
However, it was observed that in respect of persons belonging to the lower category in the Army, to which Rules 22 and 23 are applicable approprio vigoure, there would be no escape from following those Rules except on the pain of invalidation of the "enquiry".
A perusal of paragraph 38 of the judgment, where this aspect has been discussed, clearly shows that the Supreme court was conscious of the different stages and significance of enquiry and under Military Law.
The relevant portion reads thus : "However, procedure prescribed in rules 22, 23 and 24 is at a stage anterior to trial by the Court Martial which would result in deprivation of liberty and not the order directing that the charge be heard or that Summary of Evidence be recorded or that the Court Martial be convened".
Referring to the case of Flying Officer S Sundarajan (supra) (in paragraph 40 of the judgment), after pointing out that the procedure prescribed by Rule 15 of the Indian Air Force Rules is in pari materia with Rule 22 of the Army Rules, with regard to the finding that any irregularity in complying with the procedure prescribed by those Rules can by no means be regarded as affecting the jurisdiction of the Court to proceed with the trial, the Supreme Court has expressed a doubt on the view taken by the Full Bench of this Court.
Yet, the Supreme Court did not express any contrary opinion and clearly stated : "We refrain from expressing any opinion on this point."
In this view of the matter, the ratio of the Full Bench in S Sundarajan (supra) still holds the field.
For this reason, even if it be assumed that there was any error or irregularity in compliance with Rule 23, the same would not vitiate the trial.
29.
Therefore, in view of the finding on the first point, the entire proceedings culminating in the impugned orders are void.
The same are hereby quashed.
Further, the respondents are directed to compute pension payable to the petitioner, and to release all benefits admissible to him, within one month from today, as if the impugned action had never been taken against him.
30.
The Rule is made absolute.
The writ petition is allowed with costs.
Counsel's fee Rs. 3,000/-.
Petition allowed.