JV Gupta, CJ.
- This is plaintiff's second appeal whose suit for declaration has been dismissed by both the Courts below.
2.
The plaintiff was employed as a driver in the Punjab Roadways, Amritsar.
He was suspended on the basis of a complaint under section 379, Indian Penal Code.
He was duly charge-sheeted and an enquiry was held against him.
On the basis of the enquiry held against him, his services were terminated vide order dated December 21, 1979.
He challenged the same by way of the present suit on the ground that the enquiry officer did not examine the case properly and that the order passed by him was illegal, cryptic, contrary to the rules and the principles of natural justice.
In the written statement, the defendant-State pleaded that the civil court had no jurisdiction to entertain the suit.
On merits, it was pleaded that the enquiry was held against the plaintiff and it was conducted in accordance with the rules.
The order of termination was validly passed against him.
The trial court came to the conclusion that the enquiry had been conducted according to rules and the principles of natural justice and at no stage of the enquiry, the plaintiff had been prejudiced.
In view of that finding, the plaintiff's suit was dismissed.
In appeal, the learned Additional District Judge affirmed the said finding, of the trial court.
However it was urged before the lower appellate court that the plaintiff had been acquitted by the criminal court and, therefore, on that basis he should be reinstated.
The learned Additional District Judge found that it was of no consequence because the services of the plaintiff were terminated after holding a proper enquiry and therefore, the acquittal, if any, by the criminal court was of no consequence.
Ultimately, the decree of the trial court dismissing the plaintiff's suit was maintained.
3.
At that time of the motion hearing, it was submitted that in view of the acquittal of the appellant, his services could not be terminated on account of the offence said to have been committed by him.
4.
The only arguments raised on behalf of the appellant is that since he was acquitted ultimately by the criminal court, he was entitled to be reinstated and the termination order passed against him should be set aside.
5.
After hearing the learned counsel for the appellant, I do not find any merit in this appeal.
6.
The service complaint of the plaintiff were not terminated because of the criminal under section 379, Indian Penal Code alone.
The plaintiff was duly charge sheeted and a valid enquiry was held against him.
On the basis of the basis of the enquiry report, the order of termination was passed against him.
Subsequent acquittal by the criminal Court was of no consequence.
The matter might have been different if the complaint was the only basis and no enquiry as such was held against the plaintiff.
Under the circumstances, the lower appellate Court rightly observed:-  "It may be that the standard of proof required in the criminal trial is much more stricter than other cases that the appellant was acquitted in the criminal case.
This fact itself is not sufficient to hold that the enquiry has been vitiated."
7.
Consequently, this appeal fails and is dismissed with no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.