HH Kantharia, J - "Security of Service" and "equal pay for equal work" are the prayers in these petitions under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
The questions I am called upon to consider here are whether after 12 to 34 years of service, can the petitioners be still termed as "temporary" and be terminated and are they entitled to "equal pay for equal work" ?
2.
In the year 1941, the erstwhile State of Bombay, made a beginning to introduce standard Ayurvedic Course supplemented by modern advances in the field of medicine.
The RA Podar Medical College was established in the year 1941 with a view to impart Ayurvedic education to which MA Podar Hospital was attached.
Since 1941, various courses of the Bombay Faculty of Ayurvedic and Unani Systems of Medicines and Maharashtra Faculty of Ayurvedic and Unani Systems of Medicine of Pune and Bombay Universities were conducted at RA Podar Medical College, Worli, Bombay.
Due to rapid changes in the courses of Ayurved at the above College, it was not possible to establish a definite pattern of teaching staff.
Moreover, the Universities in the State, for example Pune, Nagpur and Marathwada had not prescribed a common pattern of teaching staff due to which no common recruitment rules for the teaching posts at the Government Ayurvedic Colleges could be framed.
The position at the RA Podar Medical College in Bombay was a peculiar one since it was having large teaching staff on the part-time basis whereas the Ayurvedic Colleges in Nagpur and Marathwada had a definite full time pattern of teaching staff on the basis of the staffing pattern prescribed by the Nagpur and Marathwada Universities.
Further, as there was a general shortage of qualified teachers with adequate teaching experience, the RA Podar Medical College had to employ part-time teachers.
3.
Accordingly, the petitioners herein were employed on the part-time basis as could be seen from the facts of the different writ petitions as under :  Writ Petition No. 2870 of 1986  The petitioner, Vaidya (Kum.)
Bharati Shah, is a graduate in Ayurvedic Medicine and MA in Hindi and Sanskrit, "Ayurvedacharaya", "Sahityaratna.
"Sahitya Shastri" and "Jyotirvad".
She was appointed as Tutor in the year 1968 and thereafter Lecturer in 1970.
Her services were terminated by an order dated July 17, 1986 as respondent No. 3 was transferred from Nagpur to Bombay and on the ground that there was no necessity of her services.
Writ Petition No. 3085 of 1986  The first petitioner, Vaidya Madhav Joshi, is GFAM and MBBS of Bombay University.
He joined RA Podar Medical College (Ayurvedic) and MA Podar Hospital as Registrar and Tutor in the year 1963.
He also worked as Demonstrator in 1967 and 1975.
The second petitioner, Vaidya DD Masrani, is GFAM of the University of Bombay.
He joined services at the Podar Medical College and Hospital as Demonstrator in 1967.
The third petitioner, Vaidya Umashankar Dwivedi, is also GFAM of the Bombay University.
He was appointed as Demonstrator in 1968 and then as Tutor in 1969 and again as Demonstrator in 1975.
The fourth petitioner, Vaidya RP Gupta, is BAMS He has been working as Demonstrator from 1970 onwards.
The fifth petitioner, Vaidya MP Gupta, is GFAM and joined as House Surgeon in 1970. lie worked as Registrar and Tutor in 1971 and from 1972 the has been working as Demonstrator.
Writ petition No. 2541 of 1987  The petitioner, Vaidya Jaiwant Balkrishna Naik, is GFAM of Bombay University.
He joined as Demonstrator in 1967 and continuously worked upto January 24, 1990 when he resigned.
Writ petition No. 951 of 1989  The petitioner, Vaidya Naresh Tambwekar, had passed GFAM examination of Bombay University in the year 1958.
He was appointed as Houseman on surgical side on 1.12.1958 where he worked upto 15.5.1959.
From 16.5.59 to 9101959 he was Casualty Medical Officer.
From 1101959 to 14.11.1961 he was Registrar and Tutor.
From 15111961 to 18.9.1962 he performed the duties as Assistant Pathologist and Demonstrator.
Lecturer in Sharir Rachana and Tutor in Anatomy were his designations from 1991962 to 1411964.
From 1511964 to 12.2.1981 he was Assistant incharge of Surgical OPD, Tutor in Surgery and Lecturer in Shalya-Shalakya.
From 15.2.1981 he has worked as head of the Netra Vibhag.
Writ Petition No. 2297 of 1989  The first petitioner, Dr. Sangappa Nagral, after passing GFAM from Bombay University in the year 1956 joined the Podar Medical College and Hospital in November, 1956 as House Surgeon.
He was Casualty Medical Officer from August, 1957 to November, 1958 and Surgical Registrar and Tutor from December 1958 to January, 1963.
He worked as Assistant Surgeon from 1963 to 1982.
Since 1982 he has been working as Lecturer.
The second petitioner, Dr. Vijay Inamdar, is also GFAM of Bombay University.
From 1965 to 1968 he worked as Registrar and Tutor, from September onwards he worked as Assistant Vaidya and from 1981 onwards as head of the unit in Prasuti Tantra Stree Roga and Kumar Bharutya.
The third petitioner, Dr. Ravindera Upadhyaya, is D.F.A.M.
He has been working as Medical Officer incharge of O.P.D.
and Tutor in Kayachikitsa.
The fourth petitioner, Dr. Shivram Mehra, is GFAM He has been continuously working as Assistant Head of ENT Department from February, 1970.
He has also been taking lectures of final year students.
The fifth petitioner, Dr. Hanmanthrao Palep, is again GFAM He was employed as Vaidya in the year 1972 in which capacity he has been continuously taking lectures, doing clinical work and carrying out operations.
4.
The case of the petitioners is that although they have been working in various capacities, as stated above, on part-time basis, with RA Podar Medical College (Ayurvedic) and MA Podar Hospital, Worli, Bombay which is an integral unit fully controlled and managed by the Government of Maharashtra, through Dean of the College and the Hospital and the Director of Ayurveda, their monthly emoluments have been as meagre as Rs. 139/- to Rs. 202/-.
Apart from being part time teachers as above, they have been examiners at various University examinations at the graduate and post-graduate levels in different Universities.
Their duty hours have been anywhere between 4 hours to 6 hours daily and sometimes even more.
They, therefore, claim that they should be paid exactly half of the salary paid to the full-time teachers and they should also be treated as permanent and be granted all the benefits available to the permanent members of the teaching staff, of course, in their cadre of part-timers.
According to them, their services cannot be terminated as was done in the case of the petitioner in Writ Petition No. 2870 of 1986 and other petitioners who are under a threat of being terminated as now the Government has taken a policy decision of employing full time teachers in the Ayurvedic Institutions.
5.
The writ petitions are opposed by the State of Maharashtra on the grounds that the petitioners were employed purely on temporary basis on fixed salary and dearness allowance as admissible which employment they had accepted without any reservations and as such the Government has a right and power to terminate their services.
The contention of the Government is that in order to fulfil the requirement of the staffing pattern prescribed by the Central Council of Indian Medicine, the Government vide Government Resolution Nos. (i) U.D.
and P.H.D.
No. 1075/1655/P.H.3 dated 24.5.1976 and (ii) RAP 1076/9438/P.H.3 dated 1911977 have sanctioned additional staff and converted certain part time posts into full-time ones as a result of which the services of the present incumbents to the part time posts in the RA Podar Medical College were required to be terminated.
Further, according to the Government, as the MA Podar Hospital is attached to RA Podar Medical College as a teaching hospital, the teaching staff working at the Medical College have to perform the duties in the Medical hospital also and now there is no separate staff for the hospital prescribed by the Central Council of Indian Medicine and in view of this position, the service of the present incumbents to the part-time posts attached to MA Podar Hospital are also required to be terminated.
According to the respondents, as a result of the policy decision taken by the Government, as stated above, the part-timers had to be terminated and be replaced by the full-timers.
It is also contended by them that the petitioners have been offered full time employment which they are unwilling to accept and, therefore, it cannot and does not lie in their mouth to say that injustice is being done to them.
Thus, the Government contends that the temporary teachers cannot claim the status of being permanent and all the consequential benefits flowing from the permanent status.
The Government also contends that the petitioners have been working as per the time-table and for less than four hours a day and as such they are not entitled to half the salary of the full timers.
6.
On behalf of the petitioners Mr. Sawant, Mr. Zaiwalla, Mr. Desai and Mr. Kochar urged that the petitioners have been holding civil posts although on the part-time basis and as such they are entitled to protection under Articles 16 and 311 of the Constitution of India and their services cannot be arbitrarily terminated.
According to the learned counsel, the employment of part-time teachers in professional teaching institutions is a well recognised phenomena and since the petitioners are equally qualified and doing the same work as the full-timers they are entitled to equal pay for equal work i.e. half the salary of the full-timers.
The submissions of the learned Counsel of the petitioners are controverted by the learned Government Pleaders, Mr. Shinde, Mrs. Shenoy and Mr. Saraf urging that the petitioners were appointed purely on temporary basis and the Government is within its rights to terminate their services when not required.
According to them, the services of the petitioners are not sought to be terminated arbitrarily but in order to implement the new policy of the Government to employ full timers in the institutions imparting education in Ayurved throughout the State of Maharashtra.
They also submitted that the petitioners have not been doing exactly half the work that the full-timers have been putting in and, therefore, they are not entitled to half the salary of the full-timers on the basis of "equal pay for equal work."
7.
Now, it is an admitted fact that the petitioners have been working at the Podar Medical College and Podar Hospital in various capacities for the last 12 to 34 years on the part-time basis.
It is also not in dispute that the employment of part-time teachers in the professional teaching institutions is a well recognised phenomena.
It is again not in dispute that one of the methods of employing teachers is on part-time basis by the rules and regulations of the University of Bombay to which Podar Medical College and Podar Hospital are affiliated.
8.
Thus, under Statute 409 of the Bombay University at Item No. (xxiii) (A) a teacher is defined as under :  "Teacher" within the meaning of section (2)(30) of the Act, shall, in addition to full-time Professor, Associate Professor, Reader, Lecturer, Demonstrator, Tutor, Master of Method or Director of Physical Education, if any, in any conduct constituent or affiliated college or recognised institution in the University include - (a) Part-time Professor, Associate Professor, Reader, Lecturer, Demonstrator, Tutor, Master of Method or Director of Physical Education, if any, in any conducted, constituent or affiliated college or recognised institution in the University, provided he imparts instruction for at least 4 hours per week; (b) The following persons, whether serving full-time, part-time or in an honorary capacity in any conducted, constituent or affiliated college or recognised institution in the University, provided that (a) a person serving in a part time capacity imparts instruction for at least 4 hours per week and (b) a person serving in an honorary capacity (i) in a Medical or Dental College is available on the premises of the College/attached hospital for at least 4 hours per day or (ii) imparts instruction for at least 2 hours per week in a college in any other Faculty."
Then as per item No. (xxiv) a "temporary appointment means an appointment made on a purely temporary basis either in a permanent post or a tenure post or against a temporary position/vacancy.
It is important to note here that the Podar Medical College and Hospital were not established on a temporary basis and the nature of work given to the petitioners was also not of temporary nature.
They have been working there for over thirty years and were not appointed for a limited period to do work that was essentially of temporary nature nor were they appointed temporarily as additional teachers in connection with temporary increase in work of a permanent nature.
It is no doubt true that the appointment letters issued to the petitioners mention that the petitioners were appointed purely on temporary basis and were liable to be terminated at any time without giving notice and without giving any reason.
However, it is important to note that the petitioners while joining the present services, like any other Government servant, were to satisfy the condition that they were physically found fit in medical examination and they had to take an oath of allegiance.
In other words, they were treated as part-time government servants.
The Government by its Resolution No. SRV-1075-X dated 19th September, 1975 had made it amply clear that every Government servant who had rendered continuous service for not less than three years in a post or posts should be deemed to be a permanent Government servant for all purposes, including the admissibility of full pensionary benefits.
To put it differently, by this Resolution, the Government had taken a decision that those Government servants who were temporary but had put in continuous service of not less than three years were to be treated as permanent.
Therefore, it cannot lie in the mouth of the Government now to say that the petitioners here were temporary Government servants and were liable to be terminated for no rhyme or reason.
9.
The Supreme Court in case of AK Pathak and others v. Secretary to the Government of India, Ministry of Defence and another, (1987) 11 L.L.J.
140 had observed that to treat continuous officiating service as temporary would be arbitrary and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of Constitution of India.
Their Lordships of the Supreme Court also referred to and relied upon a decision of the same Court in the case of Narender Chaddha v. Union of India, 1986 (52) F.L.R.
403 (SC) in which it was held that to treat the continuous officiation of one officer as temporary would be arbitrary and violative of Articles 14 and 16.
A Division Bench of this Court (Lentin and Puranik, JJ.)
in case of Laxman Mahadev Tell v. Principal Shri Pancham Khemraj Mahavidayalaya, Savantwadi and Ors., (1989)1 C.L.R.
89 had held that "though purportedly in a temporary capacity, indisputably the petitioner throughout worked as a peon without break in service right from March, 1981 till 19th June, 1986 when his services were abruptly terminated.
This long spell of over five years of continuous service without break cannot mean that though the petitioner was initially employed in a temporary capacity, he continued to be in a temporary capacity indefinitely.
The very fact that it was not thought necessary to dispense with the petitioner's services for over 5 long years by itself indicates that his services during these years cannot be said to be merely temporary.
A temporary employee cannot be kept in suspended animation indefinitely.
It is unfair to an employee and an unwarranted privilege on an employer to keep an employee indefinitely in a temporary capacity and thereafter at his sweet will and pleasure and irrespective of the length of uninterrupted service put in, unceremoniously terminate the employment under the excuse that the employment was temporary.
The length of uninterrupted service, as in this case, confers on the employee, the mantle of permanency and not the eternal suspense of temporariness".
Thus, the long spell of temporary service has to be treated as permanent, in the above mentioned case before this Court, the temporary Government servant had worked only for five years but the petitioner here had worked over 12 to 34 years and it would be quite unreasonable, unfair and unjust to term them as temporary and terminate their services.
As the record shows, when it suited the Government to employ the petitioners as temporary hands because no full timers were available, the Government merrily carried on with the services of the petitioners for a long period of 34 years and now when it does not suit them, they turn round and tell the petitioners that they are out of the job as, they were temporaly.
In my opinion, this is the worst kind of exploitation which any employer can ever indulge in.
10.
The Supreme Court in the case of West Bengal State Electricity Board v. DB Ghosh, A.I.R. 1985 SC 722 had observed that a regulation that authorises the termination of services of a permanent employee by serving three months notice or on payment of salary for the corresponding period in lieu thereof, was ex-facie 'totally arbitrary' and 'capable of vicious discrimination.'
The Supreme Court had further observed that it was a naked 'hire and fire' rule and parallel of which was to be found only in the "Henary VIII clause" which deserved to be banished altogether from employer-employee relationship.
In view of this position in law, I am not at all impressed by the argument of the learned Government pleaders that the petitioners herein were appointed purely on temporary basis and therefore, their services could be terminated at the sweet will of the Government.
As a matter of fact, on completion of three years of continuous service, the petitioners had become permanent.
In the case of Central Inland Water Transport Corporation and another v. Brojo Nath Ganguly and another, A.I.R. 1986 SC 1571 the Supreme Court was dealing with the matter involving Rule 9(i) of the Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Limited (Service Discipline and Appeal Rules, 1979 which empowered the Corporation to terminate the service of permanent employee without giving any reason and by giving notice.
It was held therein that "whereas various other provisions of the service rules of the Corporation mention grounds on which services of an employee can be terminated, clause (i) of Rule 9 is the only rule which does not state in what circumstances a permanent employee can be removed from service.
Clause (i) of rule 9 is void under section 23 of the Contract Act as being opposed to public policy and is also ultra vires Article 14 of the Constitution to the extent that it confers upon the Corporation the right to terminate the employment of a permanent employee by giving him three months notice in writing or by paying him the equivalent of three months basic pay and dearness allowance in lieu of such notice in that, besides being arbitrary and unreasonable, it wholly ignores audi alteram partem rule.
It is also violative of directive principles contained in Articles 39(a) and 41.
It cannot be supported on the basis of mutuality on the ground similar right is conferred on employees also".
The Supreme Court further observed the principle deducible from various precedents is that the Courts will not enforce and will, when called upon to do so, strike down an unfair and unreasonable contract, or an unfair and unreasonable clause in a contract, entered into between parties who are not equal in bargaining power.
For instance, the above principle will apply where the inequality of bargaining power is the result of the great disparity in the economic strength of the contracting parties.
It will apply where the inequality is the result of circumstances, whether of the creation of the parties or not.
It will apply to situations in which the weaker party is in a position in which he can obtain goods or services or means of livelihood only upon the terms imposed by the stronger party or go without them.
It will also apply where a man has no choice, or rather no meaningful choice, but to give his assent to a contract or to sign on the dotted line in a prescribed or standard form or to accept a set of rules as part of the contract, however unfair, unreasonable and unconscionable a clause in that contract or form or rules may be.
The types of contracts to which the principle formulated above applies are not contracts which are painted with illegality but are contracts which contain terms which are so unfair and unreasonable that they shock the conscience of the Court.
They are opposed to public policy and require to be adjudged void."
11.
In these petitions, no rule is pointed out under which the Government can terminate the services of the petitioners and the Government now takes shelter under the appointment letters which state that the services of the petitioners could be terminated without giving any reasons.
In this connection, a reference could be usefully made to a decision of the Supreme Court in case of OP Bhandari v. Indian Tourism Development Corporation Ltd and ors., A.I.R. 1987 SC 111, in which the Supreme Court was considering the validity of Rule 31(v) of the Indian Tourism Development Corporation (Conduct, Discipline and Appeal) Rules, 1978 which authorises the Corporation to terminate the services of an employee by merely giving a notice of termination.
The Supreme Court therein observed :  "This rule cannot co-exist with Articles 14 and 16(1) of the Constitution of India.
The said rule must, therefore, die, so that the fundamental rights guaranteed by the aforesaid constitutional provisions remain alive.
For, otherwise, the guarantee enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution can be set at naught simply by framing a rule authorising termination of an employee by merely giving a notice.
In order to uphold the validity of the rule in question it will have to be held that at the tenure of service of a citizen who takes up employment with the State will depend on the pleasure or whim of the competent authority unguided by any principle or policy.
And that the services of an employee can be terminated even though there is no rational ground for doing so, even arbitrarily or capriciously.
To uphold this right is to accord a "magna Carta" to the authorities invested with these powers to practice uncontrolled discrimination at their pleasure and caprice on considerations not unnecessarily based on the wellfare of the organisation but possibly based on personal likes and dislikes, personal preferences and prejudices.
An employee may be retained solely on the ground that he is a sycophant and indulges in flattery, whereas the services of one, who is meritorious (but who is wanting in the art of sycophancy and temperamentally incapable of indulging in flattery) may be terminated.
The power may be exercised even on the unarticulated ground that the former belongs to the same religion, faith or is the disciple of the same religious teacher or holds opinions congenial to him.
The power may be exercised depending on whether or not the concerned employee belongs to the same region, (religion) or to the same caste as that of the authority exercising the power, of course, without saying so.
Such power may be exercised even in order to make way for another employee who is favourite of the concerned authority.
Provincialism, casteism, nepotism, religious fanaticism and several other obnoxious factors may in that case freely operate on the mind of the competent authority in deciding whom to retain and whom to get rid of.
And these dangers are not imaginary ones.
They are very much real in organisations where there is a confluence of employees streaming in from different states.
Such a rule is capable of robbing an employee of his dignity and making him a supine person whose destiny is at the mercy of the concerned authority (whom he must humour) notwithstanding the constitutional guarantee enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
To hold otherwise is to hold that the fundamental right embedded in Articles 14 and 16(1) is a mere paper tiger and that it is so ethereal that it can be nullified or eschewed by a simple device of framing a rule which authorises termination of the service of an employee by merely giving a notice of termination.
Under the circumstances the rule in question must be held to be unconstitutional and void."
12.
In this view of the matter and the well-settled position in law, the services of the petitioners who achieved the status of permanent Government servants, on part-time basis, cannot be terminated.
They held civil post and, therefore, are entitled protection under Articles 16 and 311 of the Constitution of India.
Their services can be terminated only in the same way and by the same method by which the services of permanent full-time government servants can be terminated.
Hence the petitioners are entitled to all the benefits flowing from that their status of being permanent government servants, in respect of service conditions, albeit, in their cadre of part-timers.
They cannot expect and in fact it is not their case that they are entitled to everything that the full-time Government servants are entitled to and all that they want is their right as permanent part-time Government employees such as promotions etc. in their cadre of part-timers.
13.
The other point involved in these matters is whether the petitioners are entitled to half the salary of the full-time teachers on the principle of equal pay for equal work.
It is not in dispute that the petitioners possess the same qualifications and they do the same work as the full-timers.
It is their case that they are required to be on duty daily for four hours and in fact many a time they worked for more than four hours in a day.
According to the respondents, the full-timers perform duties daily for seven hours whereas the petitioners hardly work for an hour or two everyday and sometimes less than three to four hours in a week and, therefore, they cannot be equated with the full-timers and cannot get exactly half the salary of the full-timers.
Whether the petitioners perform duties for four hours or more daily is of some controversy as can be seen from the affidavits and counter affidavits and rejoinders and sur-rejoinders filed on behalf of both sides.
However, it is very important and also pertinent to note that the appointment letters of the petitioners show that the petitioners were required to work for four hours daily as per the instructions of the Head of the Department or the Principal.
In some of the appointment letters it is also mentioned that they would be required to be in the hospital for four hours every day and till the last patient was seen or as directed by the Superintendent of the hospital.
It is the case of the petitioners that under such appointment letters they have been performing duties both at the college and at the hospital sometimes more than four hours a day.
They also submit that what the respondents have shown in their affidavits are the duty hours as per the time-table which indicate only the periods of teaching and the same do not reflect the duty hours spent in the hospital.
The record clearly shows that the petitioners have been performing duties at the college and also at the hospital and when that is taken into consideration they have been spending more than four hours on duty everyday.
On their own admission, the respondents have shown that the full- timers, work for seven hours daily.
It means that the part-timers are putting in slightly less time than the full-timers.
That being so, they are entitled to at least half the salary of the full-timers if not more.
14.
Again, whether or not the part-timers should get half the salary of the full-timers can be inferred from the Government Resolutions.
Thus, by a Government Resolution No. USG-1179/152275 XXXII (CELL) dated 15th February 1979 it was resolved that such of the part-time teachers employed by the various private managements of the non-Government Colleges of Arts, Science, Commerce and Education as have/had adequate workload (i.e. not less than 8 periods per week) should be held eligible from January 1, 1973 for half of the new U.G.C.
recommended scale plus dearness allowance, if any, at rates laid down from time to time by Government for part-time Government servants.
Then, by another Government Resolution No. U.S.G.
1179/170950/(137)/XXXII (CELL) dated 4th September, 1980 it was resolved that the part-time teachers in Government and non-Government Arts, Science, Commerce and Education Colleges in the State drawing pay of Rs. 300 pm or more should be he held eligible with effect from 1st April, 1980 to half of the dearness allowances admissible to the full-timers' scale of Rs. 700-1600 prescribed for the post of Lectuers and thus a part-time Lecturer drawing pay of Rs. 350/- pm will be eligible for half the dearness allowances admissible to the Lecturer drawing pay of Rs. 700/- per month.
The University of Bombay also provided as per Statute 449 that the provisions of the Statute applicable to the full-time teachers shall be made applicable mutatis mutandis to the part-time teachers subject to some exceptions as to the hours of work or period of instructions undertaken by them.
It was further provided that the part-time teachers shall be entitled to all kinds of leave to which full time teachers are entitled in accordance with Statute 425 subject to the condition that the quantum of casual leave in a year being limited to 8 days.
Thus, there is no reason why the petitioners should not be entitled to half of the salary and dearness allowances admissible to the full-timers.
It has been repeatedly urged by the learned Government Pleaders that what is applicable to the part-time teachers in Arts, Science, Commerce and Educational Colleges cannot be made applicable to the petitioners teaching in a medical college and working in a medical hospital.
I find no substance in this argument for the simple reason that as part-time teachers imparting instructions to the students of a Medical College which is attached to the Medical Hospital, the petitioners have been working in the field of education and the Government is bound by their Resolutions dated 15th February, 1979 and 4th September, 1980 in the matter of giving them half the salary and dearness allowance of the full-timers as was doing in the case of the part-timers in the Arts, Science, Commerce and Education, Colleges.
The case of the petitioners is in no way different from that of the part-timers working in Arts, Science, Commerce and Education Colleges and if they are treated differently it would amount to hostile discrimination perpetuated against them.
15.
The law as to equal pay for equal work is well-settled.
Thus, in the case of Jaipal and others v. State of Haryana and others, A.I.R. 1988 S.C 1504 it was observed that "Article 39(d) contained in Part IV of the Constitution ordains the State to direct the policy towards securing equal pay for equal work for both men and women.
Though Article 39 is included in the Chapter of Directive Principle of State Policy but it is fundamental in nature.
The purpose of the Article is to fix certain social and economic goals for avoiding any discrimination amongst the people doing similar work in matters relating to pay.
The doctrine of 'equal work equal pay' would apply on the premise of similar work, but it does not mean that there should be complete identity in all respects.
If the two classes of persons do same work under the same employer, with similar responsibility, under similar working conditions, the doctrine of equal work equal pay would apply and it would not be open to the State to discriminate one class with the other in paying salary.
The State is under a Constitutional obligation to ensure that equal pay is paid for equal work.
Also, it is too late in the day to disregard the doctrine of equal pay for equal work on the ground of one employment being temporary and the other being permanent in nature.
A temporary or casual employee performing the same duties and functions is entitled to the same pay as paid to a permanent employee.
So also, the difference in mode of selection will not affect the application of the doctrine of "equal pay for equal work" if both the classes of persons perform similar functions and duties under the same employer.
16.
Then, in YK Mehta and others v. Union of India and another, A.I.R. 1988 SC 1970 the Supreme Court had held that "When the posts under the two different wings of the same Ministry are not only identical, but also involve the performance of the same nature of duties, it will be unreasonable and unjust to discriminate between the two in the matter of pay.
One of the directive principles of State Policy, as embodied in clause (d) of Article 39 of the Constitution, is equal pay for equal work for men and women.
The provision of Article 39(d) has been relied upon by the petitioners.
The Directive Principles contained in Part-IV of the Constitution, though not enforceable by any Court, are intended to be implemented by the State of its own accord so as to promote the welfare of the people.
Indeed, Article 37 provides, inter alia, that it shall be the duty of the State to apply these principles in making laws.
Even leaving out of our consideration Article 39(d), the principle of equal pay for equal work", if not given effect to in the case of one set of Government servants holding same or similar posts, possessing same qualifications and doing the same kind of work, as another set of Government servants, it would be discriminatory and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution."
17.
Under the circumstances, the Government here was not justified in turning down the claims of the petitioners that they should be treated permanent in their part-time employment with the government and they should be paid half the salary and dearness allowance of what the full-timers get.
The Government in a welfare State cannot afford to say that its part-time employees after 34 years of service could be still termed as "temporary" and be thrown out of job on a specious ground that they were appointed purely on temporary basis.
It is not only surprising but also shocking to note that the petitioners who have put in part-time services with the Government from 12 to 34 years are paid as meagre a salary as Rs. 139/- to Rs. 202/- per month.
In these days of price rise and rise in the cost of living, in all probability, this amount will not cover even the travelling expenses of the petitioners from their place of residence to the place of work.
It is not understandable as to how the Government which had taken a decision that the part-time teachers in other colleges would be eligible for half the salary and dearness allowance on such of salary effective from January 1, 1973 now turn round in the month of July, 1990 and say that the petitioners will not be entitled to such benefit on a flimsy ground that the Podar Medical College and Hospital cannot be compared with a College imparting instructions in Arts, Science, Commerce and Education.
The attitude of the Government here is, to put it very mildly, most unreasonable, unfair and unjust.
It was observed the Supreme Court in the case of Union of India v. MP Singh and others, 1990(60) F.L.R.
738 that "justice is alert to differences and sensitive to discrimination.
It cannot be measured in terms of money.
The Government of a Welfare State has gruelling task of being fair and just and so justice oriented in its approach and outlook."
18.
In the premises aforesaid, the following conclusions are drawn :  (a) The petitioners are declared as the permanent part-time Government servants effective from the day they had completed three years of service in their respective assignments;  (b) they are entitled to all the benefits flowing from their status of being permanent part-time Government servants in respect of service conditions such as promotion etc. applicable to other part-time permanent Government servants; c) their services cannot be and shall not be terminated in an arbitrary manner as was done in case of the petitioner in Writ Petition No. 2870 of 1986 and they shall be treated on par with any other permanent government servant and be dealt with accordingly; d) they are entitled to protection of Articles 14, 16 and 311 of the Constitution of India; e) they are entitled to half the salary of the full-time teachers as was available to the part-timers working in colleges of Arts, Science, Commerce and Education effective from January 1, 1973 in terms of Government Resolution No. USG-1179/152275 XXXII (CELL) dated 15th February, 1979;  (f) they are entitled to half of the dearness allowance admissible to the full-time teachers effective from April 1, 1980 in terms of Government Resolution No. USG 1179/170950/(137)/XXXII (CELL) dated 4th September, 1980; g) the petitioner in Writ Petition No. 2870 of 1980 whose services were terminated with effect from July 17, 1986 shall be reinstated with continuity of service and full back wages; (h) the petitioner in Writ Petition No. 2541 of 1987 shall be entitled to the arrears of Wary and dearness allowance under this judgment only upto January 24, 1990; (i) the Government is directed to work out all the arrears of salary and dearness allowance due to the petitioners under this judgment within a period of one month from today and pay the same to the petitioners on or before September 1, 1990 along with their salary for the month of August, 1990 failing which the government will be liable to pay at the rate of 13 per cent per annum on such amounts effective from September 1, 1990.
19.
Rule in each of the petitions is made absolute in terms aforesaid with costs.
Rule made absolute.