SS Sodhi, J - In proceedings under Section 33 C(2) of the Industrial Disputes, Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Act'), the Labour Court, Ludhiana, by its impugned orders of April 13, 1987 Annexure P-3, directed that the respondent-workmen be treated at par with temporary employees of the Punjab State Electrical Board in the matter of amounts claimed by them as salary and allowances.
This relief having been granted to them, in terms of the standing orders earned by the petitioner under the Industrial Employment (Standing Order) Act, 1946.
2.
It is the case of the petitioners that the respondent-workmen were not covered by the Standing Orders in question and it was beyond the jurisdiction of the Labour Court in proceedings under Section 33-C(2) of the Act, to adjudicate on the controversy, whether or not Standing Orders were applicable to the respondent-workmen too.
3.
The law is, now well-settled that Standing Orders framed under the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946 have the force of law and are consequently binding upon both the employer and the workmen.
Any right conferred thereby upon the employees cannot, but be treated as their pre-existing right.
This being so, a claim based upon such right would clearly be amenable to the jurisdiction of the Labour Court under Section 33-C(2) of the Act.
What is more, it is also equally well-established that mere denial of a claim put forth by a workman cannot by itself oust the jurisdiction of the Labour Court under Section 33-C(2) of the Act.
4.
In the present case, the respondent workmen admittedly have more than one year's service to their credit.
5.
A reference to the relevant Standing Orders would show that workmen have been classified into three categories (a) temporary, (b) casual, and (c) apprentice.
Further, in the note below the explanation to rule 3 of the Standing Orders, it has been provided that a casual workman or an apprentice who has put in one year's continuous service shall be treated at par with the temporary workmen.
The respondent-workmen, even though, initially employed as 'Daily rated workers' having been in continuous service for a period exceeding one year, must in terms of this note below the Explanation, be treated at par with temporary workmen.
6.
Faced with this situation, counsel for the petitioner sought to contend that the Standing Orders governed only 'Work-charged workmen' and not 'Daily rated workmen'.
He adverted in this behalf to the title of the Standing Orders, which is reproduced hereunder :  "Standing Orders framed under Industrial Employment (Standing Order) Act, 1946 with respect to work-charged workmen employed in the Industrial Establishment (not being a Factory as defined in Factories Act) of Hydel and Punjab State Electricity Board."
7.
The point sought to be canvassed, though attractive on the face of it, cannot stand scrutiny as no matter what nomenclature is given to the workmen, they had to fit into one of the three classifications under the Standing Orders.
They could at best, be classified as 'casual workmen'.
Even so, having been in continuous service for over a year, they could not, but be treated at par with temporary workers.
8.
The main stress of the counsel for the petitioner was upon the scope of the jurisdiction of the Labour Court under Section 33-C(2) of the Act.
Reference was in this behalf made to the judgment of this Court in The General Manager, Northern 'Railways, New Delhi v. The Presiding Officer, Central Government, Labour Court, Jullundar and Anr., 1983 P.L.R.
467, where the matter concerned emoluments payable to a railway employee whose removal from service was held to be illegal.
In the first instance, by the order of the Deputy General Manager, it was directed that during the period, from the date of his removal from service to his resuming duty, he be treated as on duty with full pay and allowances.
This order was, however, later withdrawn and under the orders of the General Manager it was directed that during this period, the emoluments payable to the workman be restricted to the subsistence and other allowances admissible to him in accordance with the relevant rules.
It was held that this controversy whether he was to be paid as on duty or merely subsistence allowance was beyond the scope of Section 33-C(2) of the Act.
Such is not the case here and this authority is thus of no avail to the petitioner.
9.
The more pertinent and relevant judicial precedent is provided by the judgment of the Division Bench of our Court in Inder Singh and others v. Labour Court, Jullundur and Anr., I.L.R.
1970(1) P&H 271.
The matter there concerned a claim to wages under a Government Notification fixing minimum wages.
The dispute being whether the work done by the workman fell within the definition of one or the other items enumerated in this notification.
It was held that this controversy clearly fell within the jurisdiction of the Labour Court to decide, under Section 33-C(2) of the Act.
10.
Such thus being the position in law and the facts and circumstances being as narrated, no error or lack of jurisdiction can be impugned to the Labour Court in granting to the respondent workmen the relief sought by them in proceedings under Section 33-C(2) of the Act.
The Award of the Labour Court is accordingly hereby upheld and affirmed and this petition thus dismissed with costs.
Counsel fee Rs 1,000/- (One set only).
Petition dismissed.