KP Bhandari, J - The petitioner who was Secretary of Kurur Co-op.
Agricultural Service Society Limited has filed the present petition challenging the award given by the Labour Court, Patiala.
The Labour Court vide its order dated 20187 (Annexure P.2) upheld the order of termination of services of the petitioner.
The services of the petitioner were terminated on account of absence from duty.
The petitioner approached the State Government and the matter was referred to the Labour Court for adjudication under Section 10(1)(c) of the Industrial Disputes Act and the Labour Court has upheld the order of termination vide its detailed award dated 2011987.
2.
It is the admitted case of the parties that the Labour Court gave opportunity to the respondent-employer to adduce evidence to establish the misconduct of the appellant and the petitioner was given full opportunity by the Labour Court to adduce his defence.
The Labour Court in para 10 of the award has given the detailed reasons and upheld the order of termination of services of the petitioner.
3.
According to the Labour Court, the petitioner has been found guilty of embezzlement of huge funds by the Arbitrator appointed under the Punjab Co-operative Societies Act and those awards have become final against the petitioner.
The petitioner was also convicted by the Judicial Magistrate 1st Class, Barnala, for Rs. 29,57745 and the workman-petitioner was sentenced to undergo R.I for six months and to pay a fine of Rs. 1,000/-.
The counsel for the petitioner has not been able to challenge the correctness of the finding of the Tribunal with regard to the charges found against the petitioner.
4.
The counsel for the petitioner has placed great reliance on the decision of the Supreme Court in Vishesh Kumar v. Shanti Prasad, 1985 RRR 139 : AIR 1980 SC 882 and submitted that the charges on which the Labour Court has found the petitioner guilty was not the subject matter on the basis of which order of termination was passed.
Services of the petitioner were terminated on the ground of absence from duty but the Labour Court has found new charge against the petitioner regarding embezzlement.
In this view of the matter, the counsel for the petitioner urged that even if the order of termination is justified on the new ground, the order of termination should take effect from the date of the award.
It is undoubted position that the charge of embezzlement is not the subject matter of termination of services of the petitioner.
The order of termination has been justified by the employer-respondent on fresh ground established before the Labour Court.
In this view of the matter, according to the law laid down by the Supreme Court in Vishesh Kumar's (supra), the order of termination shall be deemed to have taken effect from the date of the award.
In other words, the petitioner shall be deemed to be in service from the date of the order of termination i.e. 361981 till the date of the award i.e. 2011987.
This raises a question as to how much emoluments the petitioner should be held entitled to for this period.
In the light of the judgment of the Supreme Court, I am of the opinion that ends of justice would be amply met if the petitioner is ordered to be paid 75% of the wages from 361981 to 2011987.
I order accordingly.
Respondent No. 1 is directed to pay all the arrears of pay and allowances to the petitioner expeditiously.
In the light of the foregoing discussion, the writ petition is hereby partly allowed.
In view of the peculiar circumstances of the case, the parties are left of bear their own costs.
Petition partly allowed.