JV Gupta, CJ.
- This revision petition is directed against the order of the trial Court dated April 12, 1990, whereby the issue of the jurisdiction of the Civil Court has been decided in favour of the plaintiff and against the defendants.
2.
Raj Kumar Duggal, plaintiff, filed the suit against the defendants that the order dated July 14, 1988 dismissing him from service was null and void.
An objection was raised as to the jurisdiction of the civil Court to entertain the same.
The learned Subordinate Judge relying upon a judgment of this Court in R.S.A.
No. 330 of 1986 (Sham Kumar Moudgil v. State of Bank of India, decided on April 20, 1989, reported in 1(1990) Banking Cases 36 came to the conclusion tha the civil Court had the jurisdiction to entertain and try the suit.
3.
The learned counsel for the defendants-petitioner submitted that in view of the judgment of the Supreme Court reported in Jitendru Nath v. M/s.
Empire of India and Ceylon Teak Co, 1990 Lab I.C.
308, the relief of reinstatement and backwages is available only under the Industrial Disputes Act and the same cannot be granted by the civil Court.
The provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act impliedly exclude the jurisdiction of the civil Court as regards such relief.
The learned counsel also referred to a Division Bench judgment of this Court in Banarsi Dass v. State of (Punjab and Haryana).
In view of the above judgment of the Supreme Court no meaningful argument could be raised on behalf of the plaintiff-respondent to contest the proposition that the civil Court had no jurisdiction to try the suit as to grant the relief of reinstatement and backwages.
4.
Consequently, this revision petition succeeds.
The impugned order is set aside and issue No. 1, as to whether the civil Court had the jurisdiction to try the suit, is decided against the plaintiff and in favour of the defendants.
The parties are directed to appear in the trial Court on February 6, 1991, when the trial Courts will pass appropriate orders in the suit.
Orders accordingly.