GR Majithia, J - The defendant has come up in regular second appeal against the judgment and decree of the first appellate Court reversing on appeal those of the trial Judge and granting a declaration to the respondent/plaintiff that the order dated May 17, 1985 prematurely retiring him from Government service is illegal and invalid.
2.
The facts :-  The respondent/plaintiff joined service as Sectional Officer in the then State of PEPSU in the Department of Public Works Department (Public Health Branch) on April 20, 1954; was declared quasi-permanent in the year 1956; was made permanent on January 27, 1960; was granted Selection Grade with effect from February 3, 1968 and was promoted as Sub-Divisional Engineer on regular basis on February 3, 1971.
He was put on two years probation which he successfully completed on February 2, 1973 and was confirmed as such on May 19, 1981.
He was promoted as Executive Engineer on ad hoc basis in January, 1977 and took charge of Public Health Division, Moga on January 19, 1977 under Shri OP Satija, Superintending Engineer.
His services were regularised as Executive Engineer on October 10, 1979, on completion of probation period of one year.
On May 30, 1978, he was conveyed the report for the year 1977-78, wherein it was mentioned that he had poor control over his staff and his over all assessment was below average.
Against these remarks, he made representation to the government, which was rejected.
In that representation, he made allegation of mala fide against Shri OP Satija, reporting officer.
Mr. Satija, in his annual inspection report of the Division, did not mention any serious irregularity and gave his report as satisfactory and proposed the retention of the Division.
In his audit note, Mr. Satija stated that the work and conduct of the respondent/plaintiff was quite good and workload of Rs. 4194 lacs had been achieved during the year 1977-78 as against the workload of Rs. 30 lacs.
There was, however, difference between the reports recorded in the Annual Confidential Report and the remarks given by the Reporting Officer in reply to the audit notes for the same year.
In another report from 141978 to 3131979, adverse entry was conveyed to the respondent/plaintiff.
He submitted his representation to the government on September 12, 1979, which was rejected on April 2, 1980, on the ground that it was filed beyond limitation.
The plaintiff's integrity was doubted again as reflected in the report for the period from April 1, 1979 to March 31, 1980.
On the representation made by the plaintiff, these adverse remarks were expunged.
Adverse reports for the period from August 1, 1981 to November 30, 1981 and December 1, 1981 to March 31, 1982 were conveyed to him.
He filed representation against these adverse remarks, which were not decided till the institution of the suit.
Adverse report for the period from June 3, 1983 to November 13, 1983 was conveyed to the plaintiff, against which representation was filed, but the same was rejected.
On May 17, 1985, the defendant retired the plaintiff prematurely under Rule 3(1)(e) of the Punjab Civil Services (Premature Retirement) Rules (for short, the Rules).
The plaintiff filed representation against the order of premature retirement, which was rejected on October 17, 1985.
The order of premature retirement was principally challenged on the ground that it was based on the recommendations of the Screening and Moderation Committee, which was not posted with correct facts.
The order of premature retirement was passed without disposing of his representation against the adverse remarks for period August 1, 1981 to November 30, 1981 and December 1, 1981 to March 31, 1982.
The adverse remarks in the reports for these periods were made on the basis of the complaint made by Shri AK Batra, Junior Engineer; that complaint was found to be false and Shri AK Batra was charge-sheeted by the Superintending Engineer.
3.
The defendant in the written statement pleaded that during the year 1977-78, the performance of the plaintiff was found unsatisfactory and the Annual Confidential Report for the period from April 1, 1977 to March 31, 1978 contained adverse remarks, which were conveyed to the plaintiff.
His representation was rejected.
It was admitted that the plaintiff was appointed as Executive Engineer vide order dated October 10, 1979, but since his work was not found satisfactory during the period he remained on probation, he was reverted to the post of Sub-Divisional Engineer vide order dated October 8, 1982.
However, this order was subsequently rescinded and he was declared to have completed his probation period of one year.
The representations filed by him could not be disposed of for want of result of the enquiry.
The representations were still under consideration when the order of premature retirement was passed.
It was denied that the adverse remarks for the period from August 1, 1981 to March 31, 1982 were made on the complaint made by Shri AK Batra, Junior Engineer.
It was admitted that representation against those remarks were pending consideration when the order of premature retirement was passed.
The adverse remarks for the period from June 3, 1983 to November 13, 1983 were recorded on the basis of overall performance of the plaintiff and not merely on the basis of the complaints.
No representation was made against the adverse remarks within limitation.
It was further pleaded that the premature retirement was legal and valid.
4.
From the pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed :-  1.
Whether the orders dated 1751985 and 14/17101985 are null and void ?
OPP 2.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the declaration prayed for ?
OPP 3.
Relief.
Issue Nos. 1 and 2 were dealt with together by the trial Court and were answered against the plaintiff.
In view of findings on these issues, the suit was dismissed.
5.
On appeal by the plaintiff, the first appellate Court, after appraising the evidence, came to the conclusion that after promotion of the plaintiff as Executive Engineer, 4 of the annual confidential reports were good, one was just average which was not conveyed; 2 were below average and just average against which representation was filed and these were not disposed of before the passing of the order of premature retirement.
The basis on which this entry was made, enquiry was held, but the allegations could not be substantiated.
The annual confidential reports of the plaintiff for the period from December 12, 1983 to March 31, 1984 and April 1, 1984 to March 31, 1985 were 'Good'.
The last annual confidential report was not put before the Screening Committee.
The first appellate Court found that the plaintiff had secured 70 per cent 'good' or better reports and quashed the order of premature retirement.
6.
The learned State Counsel did not dispute that against the adverse remarks for the period from August 1, 1981 to November 30, 1981 and December 1, 1981 to March 31, 1982, Ex.P.18 and P19 respectively, representations were filed by the plaintiff and the same were not disposed of before the order of premature retirement was passed.
He also could not dispute the correctness of the finding recorded by the first appellate Court that the annual confidential reports for the period from December 12, 1983 to March 31, 1984 and April 1, 1984 to March 31, 1985, were good and the last report was, however, not put up before the Screening Committee.
He, however, maintained that a single entry casting doubt on the integrity of a Government servant was enough to order premature retirement of such an employee.
7.
The submission of the learned State Counsel is devoid of merit.
The State Government have an absolute right to order premature retirement of a Government employee in public interest.
The detail by which the question of public interest could be determined was not mentioned in the Rules.
The State Government issued executive instructions for the guidance of the proper authority to exercise the power of premature retirement and the instructions so issued in the aforesaid Government orders have binding character.
On August 4, 1978, the Government issued an order pointing out that while exercising power under rule 3 of the Rules, the service record of an employee as a whole will determine merits of each case, but if there was a single entry describing the employee concerned as person of doubtful integrity, that would justify his premature retirement under the Rules.
In the instant case, as observed earlier, doubts were cast on the integrity of the plaintiff in the annual confidential report for the period August 1, 1981 to November 30, 1981 and December 1, 1981 to March 31, 1982 (Ex.P.8 and P11 respectively).
He filed representations, but those were not disposed of before the order of premature retirement was passed.
There is no dispute that whenever an adverse entry is awarded to a Government employee, it must be communicated to him.
The object and purpose underlying the communication is to afford an opportunity to him to improve his work and conduct and to make representation to the authority concerned against those entries.
If such a representation is made, it is imperative that the authority should consider the representation with a view to determine as to whether the contents of the adverse report are justified or not.
Making of a representation is a valuable right of a Government employee and if the representation is not considered, it is bound to affect him in his service career as in Government service grant of increment, promotion and ultimate premature retirement all depend upon the scrutiny of service record.
In Gurdial Singh Fiji v. State of Punjab, AIR 1979 SC 1622, the apex Court while considering the effect of non-consideration of the representation observed thus :-  "The principle is well settled that in accordance with the rules of natural justice, an adverse report in confidential roll cannot be acted upon to deny promotional opportunities unless it is communicated to the person concerned so that he has an opportunity to improve his work and conduct or to explain the circumstances leading to the report.
Such an opportunity is not an empty formality, its object, partially, being to enable the superior authorities to decide on a consideration of the explanation offered by the person concerned, whether the adverse report is justified.
Unfortunately, for some reason or another, not arising out of any fault on the part of the appellant, though the adverse report was communicated to him, the Government has not been able to consider his explanation and decide whether the report was justified."
This principle was again emphasised in Amar Kant Chaudhary v. State of Bihar, AIR 1984 SC 531 : In Brij Mohan Singh Chopra v. State of Punjab, AIR 1987 SC 948 :, the apex Court laid down that the principle that unless an adverse report is communicated and representation, if any made, by the employee is considered, it cannot be acted upon to deny promotion, would equally apply to a case where the adverse entries are taken into account in retiring an employee prematurely from service.
8.
The plaintiff filed representation in the form of a notice under Section 80, Civil Procedure Code, for expunging remarks recorded in the annual confidential report for the period from June 3, 1983 to November 13, 1983.
The same was rejected on the ground that the representation was not made as per the procedure laid down in Government instructions.
The plaintiff's counsel informed the defendant vide his letter dated November 7, 1984 that the notice under Section 80, Civil Procedure Code dated September 10, 1984 was in fact a representation submitted by his client since complicated questions of law and fact were involved.
The defendant asked the Chief Engineer vide letter dated November 22, 1984 that as per the Government instructions, the representation of the plaintiff should be disposed of within three months of the issue of the letter and this letter was issued on receipt of notice under Section 80, Civil Procedure Code.
In response to this, the Chief Engineer forwarded his annotated comments on the notice under Section 80, Civil Procedure Code, sent by the plaintiff.
After receipt of the reply, the defendant decided that the plaintiff did not file his representation well within time, i.e. within three months.
Therefore, the Government had decided not to expunge the adverse remarks entered in his annual confidential report.
It will be apt to reproduce this letter :-  "To  The Chief Engineer, Punjab, PWD, Public Health Branch, Patiala.
Memo No. 737-BHI(2)-85/2622, Dated Chandigarh, the 25 April, 1985.
Sub : Notice under 80 CPC for expunging the adverse remarks incorporated in the ACR of Sh. Gurdas Mal XEN for the period from 3.6.83 to 131183.
Reference your Memo No. 43-PH/EI(4) Dated the 17th January, 1985, on the subject noted above.
2.
Shri Gurdas Mal, Executive Engineer, PWD, Public Health Branch could not submit any representation well in time i.e. within 3 months, therefore, Government have decided not to expunge the adverse remarks entered in his ACR.
As regards Notice under Section 80 CPC government have examined it very thoroughly.
There is no weight in the notice, the same is ignored.
The officer concerned may be informed about this decision."
A perusal of this letter indicates that the defendant did not examine the representation of the plaintiff wholly on unjust and unwarranted grounds.
However, it will be useful to reproduce the contents of the letter dated July 2, 1984 containing adverse remarks in the annual confidential report for the period from June 3, 1983 to November 13, 1983 :-  "The following adverse remarks have been recorded in your Annual Confidential Report for the period from 361983 to 13111983 :- 1) Does he take adequate interest in the training of his assisting subordinate staff and does he exercise any efficient control over them ?
While he did not manage his works well, he could not control his staff too.
He did not exert an initiative.
(The reporting officer should comment on technical experience, general management of the work intiative of the officer, achievement of targets etc.) 2) Integrity.
There was a complaint from all his SDE's and 15 Nos. affidavit from Junior Engineers which clearly provided his doubtful integrity.
3) General remarks.
He is an intriguer.
4) Overall Assessment.
Below Average.
The above shortcomings are brought to your personal notice.
Please acknowledge receipt of this letter.
9.
The integrity of the plaintiff was doubted on the basis of the complaint received in the form of affidavits from the Sub-Divisional Engineers and Junior Engineers.
Enquiry was ordered through the Superintending Engineer with regard to the allegations made in the affidavits filed by the Sub-Divisional Engineers and Junior Engineers.
The Superintending Engineer, after enquiry, submitted his report dated October 28, 1984 (Ex.P29) that the allegations remained unsubstantiated for want of proof.
The first appellate Court, after examining the record, came to the conclusion that there was nothing on the record to suggest that the report of the Superintending Engineer dated October 28, 1984 (Ex.P.29) was ever put before the Screening Committee which recommended the case of premature retirement of the plaintiff from Government service.
The integrity of the plaintiff during the period from June 3, 1983 to November 13, 1983 was doubted solely on the basis of the complaint received in the form of affidavits from the Sub-Divisional Engineers and Junior Engineers.
The allegations in the complaint were found to be unsubstantiated by the Superintending Engineer in his report (Ex.P.29).
It was wholly unjust and unfair on the part of the authorities for having taken into account this adverse entry for ordering premature retirement of the plaintiff respondent.
The learned Assistant Advocate General tried to sustain the order of premature retirement on the basis of this adverse entry.
There was absolutely no material for recording this adverse entry except the complaints.
The first appellate Court did opine that the adverse entry in the annual confidential report of the plaintiff-respondent for the period from June 3, 1983 to November 13, 1983 was recorded on the basis of the complaint received in the from of affidavits form Sub-Divisional Engineers and Junior Engineers and on enquiry the allegations made therein were not substantiated.
The learned appellate Judge ought not to have stopped there but she should have quashed the entry for the reason that there was no basis for such an entry.
The very basis of the adverse entry, after enquiry in the complaint, was found to be substanceless.
Furthermore, as observed earlier, the plaintiff filed representation against these adverse remarks in the form of a notice under Section 80, Civil Procedure Code, which was rejected on wholly unjust grounds.
The only conclusion flowing from the conduct of the defendant is that the representation of the plaintiff against the adverse entry in his Annual Confidential Report for the period from June 3, 1983 to November 13, 1983 was not considered.
The principle of natural justice requires that if the adverse entry has to be acted upon, the same ought to have been communicated to the concerned Government employee so as to afford him an opportunity to make representation to the appropriate authority against that adverse entry.
In the instant case, this principle was violated.
I do not find any infirmity in the well considered judgment of the first appellate Court.
10.
For the reasons aforesaid, the appeal is devoid of merit and the same is dismissed but without any order as to costs for the reason that the counsel for the State adopted a very fair stand at the time of arguments.
Appeal dismissed.