GR Majithia, J - This judgment will be read in continuation of a Division Bench judgment dated June 7, 1990, to which I was a party.
After the judgment was rendered, the petitioners moved an application for review of the judgment on the ground that certain points which arise in individual writ petitions could not be urged earlier when the case was heard by the Division Bench.
The review petition was allowed by the Division Bench and the writ petitions were referred to the Single Judge for disposal.
It is in these circumstances that these writ petitions have been placed before me for dispose.
2.
This order will deposed of Civil Writ Petitions No. 3185, 3214, 3215 of 1985 and 39 of 1987.
The last writ petition has been file by the workman who was awarded compensation but was not allowed to bee reinstated in service.
In the other three writ petitions, the only point raised is that the petitioner The Punjab State Khadi and Village Industrial Board (for short, the Board) is not an 'industry' within the meaning of Section 2(j) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for short, the Act).
The Labour Court, after referring to the evidence produced on the record, came to the conclusion that the Board is an 'industry' as defined in Section 2(j) of the Act.
3.
The matter as not res integra.
In Gopal v. Administrative Officer, Madhya Pradesh Khadi and Village Industrial Board and others, (1985) 4 S.C.C.
138, a question arose for consideration whether Madhya Pradesh Khadi and Village Industries Board is an 'industry' within the meaning of Section 2(j) of the Act and their Lordships of the Supreme court held thus :-  "On fact of the case the irresistible conclusion is that the Board engages itself in the business of selling blankets.
It is therefore to be held that the Board is an industry within the meaning of the Act."
In view of this authoritative pronouncement, it is not open to the petitioners to say that the Board is not an industry within the meaning of Section 2(j) of the Act.
4.
No other argument was raised at the Bar by the learned counsel for the Board.
5.
In C.W.P.
No. 39 of 1987, the workman challenged the award of the Labour court only on the ground that the Labour Court erred in not ordering her reinstatement in service.
The Labour court awarded her compensation in the sum of Rs. 18,000/- in lieu of the relief of reinstatement in service.
It was observed by the Labour court that the petitioner did not press the reference for the reason that she had since married and was, therefore, not in a position to take up employment with the Board and requested for payment with the Board and requested for payment of compensation.
In view of this finding by the Labour Court, I do not think that the claim of the petitioner for re-instatement in service is legally sustainable.
6.
Thus for the reasons aforesaid, the writ petitions are dismissed, however, with no order as to costs.
The Labour Court directed the reinstatement of some of the workmen who are respondents in the writ petitions.
It has been brought to my notice that they have not been reinstated and given consequential benefit arising therefrom.
The Board is directed to comply with the directions given by the Labour Court in its award dated January 31, 1985, within one month from the date of receipt of copy of this judgment.
Order accordingly.