MR Agnihotri, J - This judgment will dispose of C.W.P.
No. 10510 of 1989 and sixteen other C.W.P.
Nos. 1832, 2090, 2195, 3793 and 8028 of 1987, Nos. 7252, 7726, 9220, 9650, 9762, 10041, 10042, 12025, 12824 and 15451 of 1989 and No. 5970 of 1990, in which common question of law is involved, that is, as to whether the petitioners in all these writ petitioners are employees of the Food Corporation of India and members of its regular establishment or they are employees of the individual contractors engaged and paid by them, without there being any relationship of master and servant between the Food Corporation of India and the petitioner.
2.
Food Corporation of India (hereinafter referred to as 'the Corporation' was constituted by the Act of Parliament, namely, the Food Colorations Act, 1964, with the object of procurement, storage, movement and distribution of foodgrains throughout the country.
Its functions are regulated by creating zonal offices.
The zones are further divided into regions and it is under the management of separate regional offices that activities of procuring and storing of foodgrains are carried on.
The foodgrains are stored in the godowns owned or hired by the Corporation throughout the region and watchmen/Chowkidars/Security Guards are necessarily required for the security of the godowns.
The petitioners in all the present writ petitions are these Chowkidars/Security Guards who are engaged by making local arrangement through the agency of contractors, who claim to be regular employees of the Corporation, and not labour engaged by the contractors governed by the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970.
The principal claim of the petitioners is that they should be treated and declared as regular employees of the Corporation and held entitled to the salary which the Corporation is paying to its regular departmental employees, on the principle of "equal pay for equal work", and that the Corporation should be restrained from terminating their services.
3.
The case pleaded by the Corporation in its written statement is entirely different and of denial.
According to the Corporation, after procuring the foodgrains, the same have to be stocked in food storage depots for further movement and distribution as per the directions issued by the Government of India from time to time, and as long as the foodgrains are stored, the Corporation requires Security Guards for the protection of its stocks.
Since the work of the Corporation is seasonal, sporadic and varied from region to region, the requirement of Security Guards always remains fluctuating.
It is for this reason that the Corporation at the district level enters into agreements with agencies of contractors, e.g., Security and Development Services, Jalandhar - (respondent No. 4 in C.W.P.
No. 10510 of 1989), for providing security services at its food storage depots and open storage complexes as and when it becomes necessary, along with regular staff of the Corporation.
All the petitioners, who are employees of the contractors, had been deployed by the said agencies for rendering security services at the food storage depots of the Corporation.
Otherwise the petitioners were never employed by the Corporation and there did not exist any relationship of master and servant between the Corporation and the petitioners.
The Corporation makes payment to the contractors for the security services rendered by the said agencies to the Corporation at the agreed rates from time to time and no payment is made by the Corporation direct to any person like the petitioners, who are deployed by the agencies of contractors to work at the food storage depots.
Therefore, when persons like the petitioners are working at the food storage depots, they continue to be employees of the respective agencies, that is, contractors, who have deputed them and remain under their control and discipline.
These contractors are at liberty to withdraw them at any time without the consent of the Corporation and can also transfer them from one depot to another, or to any other organisation.
Further, as per the norms fixed by the Corporation, a total of four Security Guards are required for guarding, 5,000 metric tones of foodgrains stored in a shed/godown/open storage complex.
The total Security Guards at one depot include the regular watchmen employed by the Corporation as well as the Security Guards deployed by the agencies of contractors who are called upon to supplement the permanent security staff of the Corporation.
Thus, in none of the depots where the petitioners have worked, ten or more Security Guards, including the regular watchmen, are deployed.
Hence, each one of these depots is a separate establishment within the meaning of Section 2(e) of the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970.
It has further been pleaded by the Corporation that it has obtained registration as a principal employer under Section 7(2) of the aforesaid Act of 1970, with effect from 4th August, 1986, from the Central Government, even though no registration was necessary qua agencies like contractors, as the total number of contract laborers deployed by the contractors has never exceeded ten in any establishment of the Corporation.
Though no contractor has deployed more than ten persons belonging to its contract labour at any of the establishments of the Corporation and the contractors for that purpose does not require a license under the said Act of 1970, yet as a matter of abundant caution, the contractors do hold a license under Section 12 of the Act of 1970.
4.
A technical objection has also been raised by the Corporation regarding the maintainability of the present writ petitions, inasmuch as C.W.P.
No. 13508 of 1988 was filed by the Food Corporation of India Workers' Union in a representative action before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India under Article 32 of the Constitution.
The petitioner Union also included persons working in the State of Punjab and similar/identical reliefs were prayed for by the petitioners in that writ petition, e.g., mandamus for directing the Food Corporation of India to pay the same wages to all the persons employed whether departmentalised direct labour or contract labour and to abolish contract labour in all the depots as also to treat the contract labour as its own employees and at par with the existing departmentalised labour.
These reliefs have already been declined by the Supreme Court and Committees were appointed by the State Governments for going into the question of retention or abolition of the contract labour in the godowns and depots of the Corporation.
In pursuance of the directions issued by the Supreme Court, the Central Government by notification dated 29th June, 1989, has prohibited the employment of contract labour in certain godowns and depots of the Corporation, as specified in the Schedule annexed to the said notification; and not a single depot in the State of Punjab is covered by the Scheduled to the notification, meaning thereby that the employment of contract labour in the State of Punjab has been allowed to be continued.
Therefore, no relief with regard to the abolition of contract labour can be granted to the petitioners which matter is within the exclusive domain of the State Government.
5.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and having gone through their pleadings, I find that no case has been made out by the petitioners for interference by this Court and no relief can be granted to them in exercise of writ jurisdiction.
From a close scrutiny of the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court reported as Food Corporation of India Workers' Union v. Food Corporation of India and ors., AIR 1985 SC 448, it is clear that it is neither possible nor proper for the Courts to grant the reliefs prayed for by the petitioners, and it was precisely for this very purpose that their Lordships of the Supreme Court considered it necessary to issue appropriate directions to the State Government to constitute committees for going into the matter by examining the material placed before them by the State Government.
Hon'ble the Supreme Court having considered the matter in detail found that every food storage depot shed/godown/open storage complex, was an independent establishment for the purpose of the contract labour under the aforesaid Act of 1970.
This being the position of law, the facts pleaded by the Corporation in their written statement assume importance, as it has been specifically pleaded that throughout the State of Punjab there is not a single establishment where the labour deployed by the contractors has exceeded ten in number.
On that basis, the possession of license by the contractors becomes immaterial under Section 12 of the Act of 1970, as persons engaged by the contractors and deployed by them on food storage depots as Security Guards shall remain the contract labour of the respective contractors.
This precisely is the ratio of the Division Bench of this Court in Food Corporation of India, Haryana Region v. The Presiding Officer, Central Government Industrial Tribunal, Chandigarh and anr., 1987(2) SLR 678.
6.
Attempt has, however, been made by the learned counsel for the petitioners, with the help of recent judgments of their Lordships of the Supreme Court to contend that even if factually the position is otherwise the petitioners should still be deemed and treated as regular employees of the principal employer, notwithstanding the statutory provision of the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970.
First in the line is the judgment in the case of Catering Cleaners of Southern Railway v. Union of India and anr., AIR 1987 SC 777, wherein their Lordships of the Supreme Court came to the conclusion that "on the facts presented to us and on the report of the Parliamentary Committee on petitions it appears to be clear that the work of cleaning catering establishments and pantry cars is necessary and incidental to the industry or business of the Southern Railway and so requirement (a) and Section 10(2) is satisfied, that it is of a perennial nature and so requirement (b) is satisfied, that the work is done through regular workmen in most railways in the country and so requirement (c) is satisfied and that the work requires the employment of sufficient numbers of whole time workmen and so requirement (d) is also satisfied".
Still their Lordships did not issue any mandamus directing the Central Government to abolish the contract labour system and only directed it to go into the matter for considering the desirability of abolishing the contract labour system expediously.
The second judgment is the case of M.M.R.
Khan and ors. v. Union of India and ors., Judgment Today 1990(3) SC 1, where again after thorough consideration of the admitted facts it was found that "these canteens have been in existence at their respective places continuously for a number of years.
The premises as well as the entire paraphernalia for the canteens is provided by the Railway administration and belongs to it.
The employees engaged in the canteens have also been in service uninterruptedly for many years.
Their wages are reimbursed in full by the Railway Administration."
It was further found that "the relationship of employer and employee stands created between the Railway Administration and the canteen employees from the very inception", which is not the position in the present case.
The last judgment relied upon by the learned counsel for the petitioners is Food Corporation of India Workers' Union v. Food Corporation of India and ors., Judgments Today 1990(3) SC 323, wherein the claim made was for the removal of wage disparity on the principle of "equal pay for equal work".
The case is on the face of it is distinguishable, as the Corporation had revised the wages of certain departmentalised workers (regular employees of the Corporation) at depots of West Bengal, whereas parity in pay scales was denied to those employed in depots of Food Corporation of India in Assam, Bihar, Orissa etc. Their Lordships of the Supreme Court found that both the sets of employees being on regular establishment of the Corporation, were entitled to have the same pay scale regardless of the fact whether they are employed at a certain depot in Assam, Bihar, Orissa or at any other place.
7.
In view of the aforesaid factual and legal position, there is no escape from the conclusion that the petitioners are not employees of the Food Corporation of India and no relationship of master and servant exists between the two.
The petitioners remain contract labour engaged by the respective contractors who are deployed seasonally or periodically to work as watchmen/Chowkidars/Security Guards at various food storage depots of the Corporation.
Consequently, all these writ petitions, being without any merit, are dismissed, with no order as to costs.
Petitions dismissed.