MR Agnihotri, J - This judgment will dispose of CWP Nos. 1196 of 1986, 6866 of 1989, 9053 of 1987 and 4525 of 1979, all of which relate to the litigation between Gurdaspur Central Co-operative Bank Limited (hereinafter referred to as 'the Bank') on the one hand and its employees on the other.
C.W.P.
No. 1196 of 1986, Gurdaspur Central Co-operative Bank Limited, Gurdaspur v. The Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Gurdaspur and others, 1991(1) S.C.T.
143  2.
In this petition filed by Gurdaspur Central Co-operative Bank Limited, Gurdaspur, challenge has been made to the award of the Labour Court, Gurdaspur, dated 6th November, 1985, by which 17 workmen have been ordered to be reinstated in employment, with continuity of service and full back wages for the period of their unemployment with petitioner bank.
The award under challenge has disposed of 17 consolidated references made by the Punjab Government for the adjudication of the following industrial dispute :-  "Whether termination of services of Sarvshri Baljit Singh, Miss Kanta, Balwinder Singh, Sucha Singh, Baldev Singh, Gurbachan Singh, Jodh Singh, Rattan Chand, Kuldev Singh, Rajinder Kumar, Brij Lal, Surinder Nath, Jagir Singh, Dev Raj and Ajit Singh, workmen, is justified and in order ?
If not, to what relief/exact amount of compensation are they entitled ?"
All the workmen were employed as Clerks/Peons with the Bank and their services were terminated in August, 1979.
According to the claim made by the workmen they had become eligible to the benefits provided by Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, and their services were terminated without serving them with one month's notice and without payment of any retrenchment compensation.
The plea taken by the Bank before the Labour Court was that the workmen had not completed one year's service.
Hence, the provisions of Section 25-F ibid were not attracted and, as such, no notice was required to be served on the workmen nor was any retrenchment compensation required to be paid by the Bank before terminating the services of the workmen.
After examining the relevant record produced before the Labour Court, it came to the conclusion that even though all the workmen had not completed 240 days service, yet their services were terminated in anticipation and by circumventing the accrual of rights to the workmen on account of one year's continuous service (240 days) when they were close to attaining this right.
This was unfair labour practice on the part of the Bank.
Hence, retrenchment of the workmen was illegal.
Reliance was placed by the learned Labour Court on the Division Bench judgment of this Court in C.W.P.
No. 3766 of 1983, delivered on 23rd January, 1984, in which it was held.
"To conclude, we hold that the practice of retrenching a workmen, close to his attaining a year's continuous service in order to frustrate his attaining rights under Chapter V-A of the Industrial Disputes Act, is an unfair labour practice, unless there are reasons with the employer with regard to the conduct and service of the workman being unsatisfactory.
How close should be such period towards attaining a year's continuous service and to come within the purview of 'unfair labour practice' is a question dependent on the facts and circumstances of each case.
We do not propose to lay down any guidelines on that aspect."
As a result thereof, the termination of services of the workmen was found by the Labour Court to be in violation of law and they were ordered to be reinstated with continuity of service and full back wages.
3.
Mr. HL Sibal, learned Senior Advocate, appearing for the Bank, has challenged the award on the solitary ground that the plea of unfair labour practice had not been taken by the workmen in their original claim petition.
4.
I am not impressed by the argument as this specific averment had been made and plea was specifically raised in the replication filed by the workmen before the Labour Court.
5.
Faced with this situation, the learned counsel for the petitioner-Bank contended that after termination of services of the respondent-workmen,the Bank had in fact employed 53 persons on 14th November, 1979, by fresh recruitment.
Though this temporary/ad hoc recruitment was cancelled by the orders of Joint Registrar, Co-operative Societies, Jullundur Division, on 7th December 1979, yet these persons have obtained stay order against termination of their services by filing CWP Nos. 4525 and 4585 of 1979.
In view of this, Mr. Sibal pleaded that the Bank was willing to take all the workmen in service in implementation of the award, provided the aforesaid two writ petitions of 1979 were dismissed, thereby terminating the services of the 53 persons newly recruited by the Bank.
With respect, this has nothing to do with the correctness or otherwise of the impugned award under challenge.
The fate of the aforesaid writ petitions will be decided in the later part of this judgment separately.
6.
Consequently, C.W.P.
No. 1196 of 1986 is dismissed with no order as to costs.
C.W.P.
No. 6866 of 1989  (Hari Krishan Gandotra etc. v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Gurdaspur and another)  7.
This petition is in fact in the nature of execution of the award dated 6th November, 1985, made by the Labour Court, Gurdaspur, and for the grant of the consequential reliefs flowing from the award by way of payment of back wages, bonus, leave wages, etc. At the time of admitting C.W.P.
No. 1196 of 1986 (supra) on 4th August, 1986, reinstatement of the workmen - petitioners had been stayed subject to the benefits available to the workmen under Section 17-B of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
Therefore, if during the pendency of the aforesaid C.W.P.
No. 1196 of 1986 filed by the Bank against the impugned award, the interim stay on reinstatement had been ordered by this Court, the necessary reliefs will be available to the workmen now with the dismissal of C.W.P.
No. 1196 of 1986.
8.
Accordingly, C.W.P.
No. 6866 of 1989 stands disposed of with the direction that all the reliefs flowing from the award dated 6th November, 1985 passed by the Labour Court, Gurdaspur, would be released to the workmen in the form of back wages, leave wages, bonus, etc. by the respondent-Bank, within a period of two months, as if their services had not been terminated by the Bank.
C.W.P.
No. 9053 of 1987  (Gurdaspur Central Co-operative Limited, Gurdaspur v. The Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Gurdaspur)  9.
This petition is exactly similar to C.W.P.
No. 1196 of 1986 wherein the award dated 6th November, 1985, passed by the Labour Court, Gurdaspur, has been challenged by the Bank.
Though two workmen Sukhjit Singh and Kishan Singh, respondent Nos. 2 and 3 in this writ petition, had also raised the same industrial dispute along with 15 workmen, which was the subject-matter of C.W.P.
No. 1196 of 1986, yet reference was made to the Labour Court by the State Government separately.
The learned Labour Court, after examining the factual position and (sic.)
the same reasoning came to the conclusion that termination of services of the said two workmen was in gross violation of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act, and directed the Bank to reinstate them with continuity of service and full back wages with effect from 14th August, 1979, the date on which their services were terminated.
The learned counsel for the Bank has also not advanced separate arguments in this case and adopted the same submissions as were made in C.W.P.
1196 of 1986.
10.
Hence C.W.P.
No. 9053 of 1987 is also dismissed with no order as to costs.
Both the workmen, Sukhjit Singh and Kishan Singh, respondents, will also be entitled to all the benefits flowing to them from the award dated 21st July, 1987 passed by the Labour Court, Gurdaspur.
C.W.P.
No. 4525 of 1979 (Baldev Raj Saini and 26 others v. The State of Punjab etc.)  C.W.P.
No. 4585 of 1979 : (Jaspal Singh and 21 others v. Thee State of Punjab etc.)  11.
The petitioners in these writ petitions were recruited as Clerks/Peons in response to the advertisement dated 29th November, 1978.
They were interviewed by a Committee consisting of the Joint Registrar, Co-operative Societies, Jullundur Division, Jullundur; Deputy Registrar, Co-operative Societies, Gurdaspur; Managing Director of the Batala Central Co-operative Bank Ltd, Batala, etc. Their selection was duly approved by Executive Committee of the Bank and as a result thereof, the appointment orders were issued.
Later on, the Joint Registrar, Co-operative Societies, Jullundur Division, Jullundur vide his order dated 23rd November, 1979, set aside the proceeding of the Executive Committee under Rule 80 of the Punjab Co-operative Societies Rules, on the ground that the proceedings of the meeting were not recorded by the Chief Executive Officer of the Bank, and as a consequence thereof, the appointments of the petitioners were set aside.
The petitioners were accordingly ordered to be relieved from service on 7th December, 1979.
Both the aforesaid orders dated 23rd November, 1979 (Annexure P.8) and the December, 1979 (Annexure P.10) have been challenged by the petitioners mainly on the ground that the order of setting aside the proceedings of the meeting of the Executive Committee was illegal inasmuch as the proceedings of the meeting had been duly recorded by the Manager of the Bank, who was competent to do the same and conduct the meeting under the registered bye-laws of the Bank.
Further, proceedings of the meeting of the Executive Committee, by which the petitioners were appointed, could be cancelled only under Rule 80(i-a) of the said Rules if the Registrar was satisfied that the meeting was held without proper notice or if the members had not received the notice for the meeting or if the meeting was not conducted at the appropriate place and time.
Since none of the aforesaid grounds were in existence and all the conditions were duly fulfilled, the order of the conditions were duly fulfilled, the order of cancellation of the meeting was wholly based on non-existent and irrelevant grounds.
12.
When the aforesaid writ petitions were admitted, termination of services of the petitioners was stayed by the Motion Bench in 1980.
By virtue of these orders, the petitioners have been continuing in service right till today.
13.
In the written statement filed by the Bank, preliminary objections have been taken that the petitioners being employees of the Bank, which is a co-operative society, the writ petition was not maintainable against the Bank, and that if at all, the grievance could be made by the Bank itself whose Executive Committee's proceeding have been set aside by the Joint Registrar, Co-operative Societies, and not by the employees.
Apart from the aforesaid preliminary objections, no serious dispute has been raised to the claim made by the petitioners.
14.
With respect, I do not find any force in either of the two preliminary objections.
A writ petition is maintainable against a Co-operative Society which has been held to be a State within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution, by a number of judicial pronouncements.
Regarding the locus standi of the petitioners in filing the writ petitions, they are certainly entitled to approach this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution, as their right to service is directly affected by the impugned orders.
15.
Having heard the learned counsel for the parties on merits and after going through the relevant records, I have come to the following conclusions :-  1.
That the appointments of the petitioners were made by a duly constituted competent committee and the proceedings of the committee had been recorded by the Manager of the Bank, who was competent under the bye-laws to conduct the meeting and record its proceedings; and  2.
That the Joint Registrar, Co-operative Societies, has not disclosed in the impugned order the breach of any specific rule, nor were the conditions precedent for cancelling the proceedings under Rule 80 ibid present, on the basis whereof the Joint Registrar could invoke his powers for cancellation of the proceedings.
Otherwise also, the Managing Director was competent to take any matter not already on the agenda without prior notice to its members, though no such grievance has been made by any persons on that account.
Under the circumstances, the impugned orders dated 23rd November, 1979.
Annexure P.8, passed by the Joint Registrar, Co-operative Societies, Jullundur Division, Jullundur, and dated 7th December, 1979 Annexure P-10, passed by the Manager of the Bank, relieving the petitioners from service, are wholly arbitrary.
16.
I, therefore, allow C.W.P.
No. 4525 and 4585 of 1979 and quash both the aforesaid impugned orders Annexure P-8 and P-10.
Resultantly, the petitioners shall continue in service as having been appointed by a validly constituted committee.
Since they are already in service and continuing by virtue of the stay orders granted by the Motion Bench as back as 1980, no further relief is required to be granted.
No costs.
Petition allowed.