MN Rao, J - The petitioner who was the Branch Manager of the State Bank of Hyderabad was dismissed from service as a disciplinary measure by an order Dt. 16.11.1987 passed by the second respondent-Managing Director State Bank of Hyderabad, Gunfoundary, Hyderabad, which was confirmed by the appellate authority, the first respondent by an order dated 301188.
This writ petition was filed for a certiorari calling for the records of the order of dismissal as confirmed by the appellate authority and to quash the same.
2.
The alleged acts of misconduct attributed to the petitioner occurred in 1985 when he was working as Manager of the Shabad Branch.
Four staff members of the Shabad Branch gave a written representation to the Regional Manager, State of Bank of Hyderabad making certain allegations against the petitioner; they pertain to the fictitious overdraft relating to a customer by name.
T Papi Reddy, misuse of the motor-cycle bearing Regn.
No. AAX 8925 belonging to the Bank and incurring of false expenditure to the tune of Rs. 1100/- by the petitioner on the ground of having hired a jeep purportedly for official purposes.
A preliminary investigation was conducted by one K. Raghunatha Rao, Zonal Officer (examined as MW 10 before the Enquiry Officer) of Hyderabad Office and based upon his report dated 11585 the petitioner was kept under suspension by an order dated 17585.
A charge-sheet dated 21885 containing the three following charges was served on the petitioner and he was asked to submit a written statement.
"During your incumbency as Branch Manager of Shabad Branch from 9285 to 20585 : (1) You failed to ensure and protect the interest of the Bank and discharged your duties with utmost devotion and integrity, honesty and diligence and acted in a manner unbecoming of a Bank's official as : (i) you granted an overdraft to one Shri T Papi Reddy, even though it was known to you that it was not for his use; (ii) You passed for payment on 151985 a cheque No. 116479 for Rs. 8,000/- in the above account even though the cheque was forged.
(iii) You received the payment of the cheque above referred yourself discharging it.
(2) You accepted on 3041985 a late receipt for Rs. 8,205/- from Shri Gaddam Krishna Murthy, a constituent of the Bank, in a highly irregular manner and acted in a manner detrimental to the interest of the Bank.
(3) You utilised the Bank's motor-cycle and the jeep hired, for your personal purposes and at the cost of the Bank and thus failed to discharge your duties with utmost devotion, integrity and honesty.
Your above acts are in violation of Regulation 50(4) of the State Bank of Hyderabad (Officers') Service Regulations.
Sd/-  Disciplinary authority/General Manager  (Operations)" Dt. 21st Aug, 85.
In his explanation the petitioner asserted that he was victim of a conspiracy hatched by certain staff members who were disposed inimically towards him.
On 30.4.84 an overdraft facility was given to Papi Reddy, one of the customers of the bank after his financial soundness was ascertained.
The customer Papi Reddy was not given a cheque book.
Therefore, one loose cheque bearing No. 116473 was given to him.
The customer signed the cheque and presented the same for encashment.
At that time there were no issuable notes in the Bank (the branch being very small) and the customer continued to wait at the bank hoping that some other customers might credit amounts sufficient for the bank to pay him the cash of Rs. 8,000/-.
After the office hours also Papi Reddy continued to wait at the bank and at that time one customer by name G Krishna Murthy had sent cash of Rs. 8,205/- for crediting to his account and from that amount Rs. 8,000/- was paid to Papi Reddy and a debit voucher was obtained from him with a clear understanding that he would present another cheque the next day morning.
Papi Reddy did not come to the bank the next day as he was attending a marriage function and, therefore, a message was sent to Papi Reddy to present the cheque so that the amount could be adjusted.
The Head Cashier, Kulkarni (examined as M.W.2) refused to honour the cheque on the ground that Papi Reddy was not physically present and, therefore, the petitioner acknowledg the cheque on the reverse and asked Kulkarni to post the amount against late receipt.
The other allegations relating to misuse of office motor-cycle and false expenditure in relation to hiring of jeep were also denied by him.
3.
As the explanation was found to be not satisfactory, the management appointed one B Someswara Rao as the Enquiry Authority by an order dated 20th December, 1985 to conduct enquiry against the petitioner in respect of the three charges.
On behalf of the management 10 witnesses were examined and 46 exhibits were marked.
On behalf of the charged petitioner only one witness was examined and three documents were marked as exhibits.
Among the witnesses examined was one SK Jain, (M.W.9), Government examiner of questioned documents.
His opinion was marked as Ex.M.E.28 before the Enquiry Officer.
His testimony was to the effect that the specimen signature of Papi Reddy did not tally with the signature found on the reverse of the cheque bearing No. 116479 dated 1585 and that the writing on the leave application of the petitioner (treated as specimen handwriting of the petitioner) and the writings on the body of the cheque bearing No. 116473 are by one and the same person.
In other words, his testimony is to the effect that the signature of Papi Reddy on the cheque presented in the name of the Papi Reddy was a forged one.
As regards charge No. 3 the Enquiry Officer held that :  "there was misuse of Bank's motor-cycle by Sri Jayachandra Rao (the petitioner for his personal visits.
However, it is difficult to estimate to what extent the vehicle was misused."
As regards the hire charges in relation to the jeep the finding of the Enquiry Officer was that :  "......the jeep hired for the purpose of inspection of assets charged to the Bank was not used mainly for the said purpose but mostly misused by Sri Jayachandra Rao at Bank's cost."
The disciplinary authority, the General Manager (Operations) felt that appropriate punishment for the charges held proved was dismissal from service and as the said punishment was a major penalty which could be imposed only by the appointing authority in terms of Regulation 68(3)(iii) of State Bank of Hyderabad (Officers') Service Regulations, he forwarded the entire record to the appointing authority with a recommendation to impose the penalty of dismissal.
Pursuant to that the appointing authority passed an order dated 16.11.87 imposing the punishment of dismissal.
The petitioner preferred statutory appeal to the appellate authority, the Executive Committee of the State Bank of Hyderabad and without waiting for the decision of the appellate authority he filed the present writ petition.
During the pendency of the writ petition, the appellate authority passed the order dated 301188 in No. DPC/1757 dismissing the appeal.
Thereafter WPMP No. 12171 of 89 was filed by the petitioner to quash the said appellate Order.
4.
Shri Ananth Babu, learned counsel for the petitioner contends that the petitioner was appointed by the Board of Directors as officer of the State Bank of Hyderabad and, therefore, the second respondent, the Managing Director, had no jurisdiction to pass the order of dismissal.
The dismissal order is liable to be set aside on the ground of want of jurisdiction, he contends.
5.
He also contends that the order of dismissal must be struck down on the ground that it was passed in violation of principles of natural justice.
The investigation report submitted by M.W.
10.
Sri K Raghunatha Rao was not made available although a specific request was made by the petitioner.
The Enquiry Officer declined the request on the ground that the said investigation report was not supplied to him as in terms of Regulation 68(2)(xii) the authority having custody of the document is permitted to claim privilege.
6.
The most important witness to unfold the primary charge of forgery was T Papi Reddy, but he was not examined.
The petitioner could not examine him because the said Papi Reddy gave a letter to the petitioner clearly stating that because of the pressure exerted by the staff members of the Bank he had given the complaint against the petitioner and when the petitioner requested him to appear as witness on his behalf he declined stating that there was no need to figure as witness in view of the letter given by him to the petitioner.
7.
The enquiry involved legal complexities and the material brought on record was voluminous.
The presentation Officer who represented the management before the Enquiry Officer was specially trained to conduct prosecutions.
He underwent special training in this regard.
The petitioner was represented by another Officer to conduct defence on his behalf.
A handwriting expert testified on behalf of the management in respect of the allegation of forgery.
When the petitioner had requested for permission to engage a counsel, the same was declined.
Within half an hour after the chief examination of the expert witness was over, the defence was asked to proceed with cross-examination.
This attitude on the part of the Enquiry Officer had disabled the petitioner from effectively representing his case.
The reasonable opportunity which he is entitled to establish his innocence is a basic principle of natural justice; in the absence of an advocate to defend him his defence was seriously crippled and, therefore, natural justice was breached.
The report of the Enquiry Officer was supplied to the petitioner along with the order of dismissal.
The appointing authority before making up of his mind to impose the punishment of dismissal ought to have furnished a copy of the Enquiry Officer's report to the petitioner so as to enable him to make a representation with reference to the findings recorded by the Enquiry Officer.
Supply of the report of the Enquiry Officer to enable the petitioner to prefer appeal would not cure the illegality.
When the petitioner wanted time to produce defence witnesses the same was not granted, although the management had taken several months to produce their witnesses.
Failure to afford reasonable opportunity to the petitioner to produce his witnesses had resulted in breach of principles of natural justice.
8.
The enquiry was vitiated because of the bias on the part of the Enquiry Officer : he not only rejected the just and legitimate request made by the petitioner, but he also did not record the evidence of the witnesses faithfully.
He used to prompt the witnesses while recording the evidence.
9.
In opposition to these submissions, Shri Srinivasa Murthy, learned counsel for the Bank maintains that the order of dismissal was passed after fully complying with all the legal formalities.
By the date of imposition of punishment of dismissal, under the Regulations, the competent authority to make appointments to the post held by the petitioner was the Managing Director and, therefore, the order of dismissal is not afflicted with legal infirmity of want of jurisdiction.
The petitioner is not entitled to a copy of the investigation report since the Enquiry Officer did not take that into consideration in assessing the guilt of the petitioner in respect of the charges levelled against him.
The petitioner was permitted to be represented by an officer of the Bank.
On behalf of the management also another officer was kept engaged as presentation officer.
As no advocate or legally trained person represented the management before the Enquiry Officer the petitioner was not entitled to be represented by a counsel.
Sub-Clause (vii) of clause (2) of Regulation 68 of the S.B.H.
(Officers') Service Regulations does not permit a charged officer to engage a legal practitioner in disciplinary proceedings.
The Regulations also do not entitle the petitioner to have a copy of the Enquiry Officer's report before the punishment was imposed.
No second show-cause notice is contemplated under the Regulations and the competent authority is obliged to take a decision based on the evidence already recorded.
To enable the petitioner to effectively pursue his remedy of statutory appeal he was furnished with a copy of the Enquiry Officer's report and, therefore, it could not be said that natural justice was breached.
Non-examination of Papi Reddy was inevitable.
He went back on the written complaint submitted by him to the bank authorities about the acts of misconduct committed by the petitioner and shortly thereafter gave a letter to the petitioner denying the allegations levelled by him against the petitioner.
No useful purpose would be served by examining such a person.
No one prevented the petitioner from examining Papi Reddy on his behalf.
The Enquiry Officer acted fairly and impartially.
There is no basis for the allegation that he was biased against the petitioner.
10.
The first point to be considered is whether the order of dismissal passed by the second respondent-Managing Directors was vitiated due to want of jurisdiction.
It is true that the appointing authority when the petitioner was recruited as an Officer in 1979 was the Board of Directors as per the rules then in existence-Staff Assistant Service Rules.
The State Bank of Hyderabad (Officer's) Service Regulations, 1979 (hereinafter called as the Regulations) came into force with effect from 1.10.79 except to the extent Chapter 10 relating to disciplinary proceedings which was brought into force with effect from 1480.
After the Regulations came into force, the State Bank of Hyderabad Assistants Service Rules ceased to have operation.
Regulation 67 specifies major and minor penalties.
'Disciplinary authority' as defined in clause (p) of Regulation 3 means the authority specified by the Executive Committee from time to time.
Regulation 68 says that the disciplinary authority or any higher authority may impose the penalties mentioned in Regulation 67.
The proviso to Regulation 68 is to the effect that where the disciplinary authority is lower in rank than the appointing authority in respect of the category of officers to which the officer belongs, no order imposing any of the major penalties shall be made except by the appointing authority or any authority higher than it on the recommendations of the disciplinary authority.
By Circular No. OPD/4 the Executive Committee had specified the General Manager as the disciplinary authority in respect of Officers in MMGS-II, the post which the petitioner was holding at the relevant time.
A Division Bench of this Court in W.P. No. 7398 of 1988 considered an identical question and held that clause (p) of Regulation 3 does not empower the Executive Committee to delegate its power to another person and, therefore, the major penalty imposed by the General Manager who was lower in rank than the Executive Committee was liable to be quashed.
A similar question arose before the Supreme Court in Civil Appeal Nos. 3392-3394 of 1990 in respect of certain orders passed by the General Manager, State Bank of India.
Interpreting Regulation 55 of the State Bank of India General Regulations, 1955 which is similar to Regulation 68, the Supreme Court held in the above civil appeals :  "...The only right conferred under the said provision is that the officers or employees of the State Bank cannot be dismissed by an authority lower than the appointing authority.
With the risk of repetition it may be stated that on the date when the order of dismissal has been passed, Chief General Manager had already become the appointing authority and as such the order of dismissal has not been passed by an authority lower than the appointing authority.
Apart from the view taken by us as mentioned above the Regulation 55 has been amended by a resolution of the Central Board dated August 25, 1988 with retrospective effect.
It has now been made clear in the explanation that for the purpose of clause (b) the term appointing authority shall mean and include the authority who has been designated as such in respect of such class or grade of officers or employees to which the officer or employee concerned, as the case may be, belongs at the time when such order is passed or any proceeding leading to such order or termination is initiated.
This provision now concludes the controversy if any and clearly provides that the appointing authority shall mean and include the authority who has been designated as such at the time when such order is passed."
The Supreme Court also held that if on the date of the order of dismissal the authority who passed that order happened to be the appointing authority, although the charged officer was appointed by a different authority, the dismissal order would not suffer from any legal infirmity on that score.
As admittedly by the date of the order of dismissal the second respondent/Managing Director, was the appointing authority in respect of the post held by the petitioner, the order of dismissal, cannot be faulted on the ground of want of jurisdiction.
11.
The petitioner, it is not in dispute, made a request for production of the investigation report submitted by K Raghunath Rao (MW10 before the Enquiry Officer).
That request was rejected by the Enquiry Officer observing :  "The documents over which the Bank has claimed privilege is the "Investigation report" as different from material documents like statement of witnesses etc.
The said investigation report is not provided to the Enquiry Authority along with the appointment letter and the charge-sheet.
In terms of Regulation 68(2)(xii) the authority having custody of the document is permitted to claim privilege.
The investigation report is the document of the Bank and in my view the Bank can exercise the option available to it, in respect of this particular document".
Sub-clause (xii) of clause (2) of Regulation 68 reads : On receipt of the requisition under clause (xi), the authority having custody or possession of the requisitioned documents shall arrange to produce the same before the Inquiring Authority on the date, place and time specified in the requisition : Provided that the authority having custody or possession of the requisitioned documents may claim privilege if the production of such documents will be against the public interest or the interest of the Bank.
In that event, it shall inform the Inquiring Authority accordingly."
No record has been produced before me to show on what ground privilege was claimed by the Bank.
The Enquiry Officer has not asked the Bank to produce the investigation report.
Privilege can be claimed under the proviso to sub-clause (xii) of Regulation 68(2) only if the production of a document will be against the public interest of the Bank.
It is not shown how the public interest or the interest or the interest of the Bank would suffer adversely if the investigation report was produced at the time of the enquiry.
The investigation report is dated 11585.
The officer who investigated and submitted the report is one Shri K Raghunatha Rao who was examined as MW10 before the Enquiry Officer.
This report was the basis for placing the petitioner under suspension.
In his evidence as MW10 he stated the details of the investigation conducted by him.
He asserted that he went to Shabad on 9.5.85 to conduct investigation.
He stated that when he was conducting investigation, the Head Cashier and other staff members stated to him about the petitioner remitting money and arranging payment of the amount collected by him from his brother-in-law.
To a question put by the presentation officer whether the staff members told him orally or had given anything in writing, he replied :  "The staff members have given in writing some of the above events and some were told orally which was forwarded to Head Officer."
Thereafter he identified the document M.E.15- the written complaint dated 6585 submitted by the members of the staff to the Regional Manager.
He also testified before the Enquiry Officer what certain persons stated before him.
One of his answers was to the effect that :  "Shri P Jayachandra Rao (the petitioner) also told him (Papi Reddy) that the amount will be utilised by his brother-in-law for purchased of a vehicle.
Shri Papi Reddy also stated that he is not responsible for the over-draft granted in his name by Shri P Jayachandra Rao for which he signed the documents."
From his evidence as MW10, it would appear that Shri K Raghunath Rao had recorded the statements of some persons in the course of his investigation report which was placed before me does not contain any statements recorded by Shri Raghunath Rao.
When an officer conducts a preliminary investigation and submits a report and later on figures as a witness in the enquiry and testifies as to the details of the investigation conducted by him, it is necessary that the report submitted by him should be produced to enable the delinquent to cross-examine the officer to test the veracity of his oral evidence with reference to the contents in the investigation report.
It would have been a different thing if the Officer had not testified in his evidence as to the details of the investigation conducted by him and what his report incorporated, but when he chose to depose as to the details of the investigation conducted by him, it was incumbent upon him to produce the investigation report.
The situation is akin to the evidence of an investigation officer in criminal trials.
Whatever statement an investigation officer records must be produced before the court to enable the accused to cross-examine as to the veracity of the evidence, regarding what has been recorded.
Sri Srinivasa Murthy, learned counsel for the Bank says that the Investigation Officer has not recorded statements of any witnesses but as already observed by me supra, the trend of the evidence given by Sri Raghunatha Rao, MW10 before the Enquiry Officer shows that he had recorded the statements of some persons.
It is difficult to conclude definitely as to whether or not MW10 had recorded the statements of any persons during the preliminary investigation.
The Supreme Court in Krishna Chandra v. Union of India, AIR 1974 SC 1594 at 159 para 16, adverting to the question whether a charged officer was entitled to a copy of the investigation officer's report observed :  "It is obvious that the appellant was not entitled to a copy of the report made by Mr. Srivastava or any other officer unless the enquiry officer relied on these reports.
It is very necessary for an authority which orders an enquiry to be satisfied that there are prima facie grounds for holding a disciplinary enquiry and, therefore, before he makes up his mind he will either himself investigate or direct his subordinates to investigate in the matter and it is only after he receives the result of these investigations that he can decide as to whether disciplinary action is called for or not.
Therefore, these documents of the nature of inter-departmental communications between officers preliminary to the holding of enquiry have really no importance unless the Enquiry Officer wants to rely on them for his conclusion.
In that case it would only be right that copies of the same should be given to the delinquent."
12.
In the present case the contents of the investigation report formed part of the testimony of the investigation officer MW10.
In the assessment of the guilt of the petitioner the evidence of MW10 assumes great relevance.
It, therefore, follows that the contents of the investigation report as spoken to by MW10, the investigation officer, also formed one of the basis for the Enquiry Officer to assess the guilt of the petitioner.
In the circumstances, it cannot be said that no prejudice was caused to the petitioner by reason of failure to furnish a copy of the investigation officer's report and this, I think, amounts to violation of principles of natural justice.
13.
From 11386 to 4.2.87 on different dates the prosecution witnesses were examined.
A detailed statement in this regard as mentioned in the reply affidavit is as follows :-  Witness No.
Date on which examined Time allowed for prosecution between one witness and the other for examination.
MWI 11386 to 18.6.1986 Time allowed for prosecution for presenting MWI was 3 months and 7 days ie from 12386 to 1761986.
MWII, III, IV, V 17.6.1986 to 2971986 Adjourned for 3 months from 1631986 to 16686.
M.W.VI 2971986 Time allowed for production of MW VI by prosecution was one month nine days, i.e. from 21686 to 28786.
M.W.VIII 2971986 to 281986, 25.9.1986 to 2091986 and 20.11.1986 to 211186.
Time allowed for prosecution one month twenty days from 27986 to 191186.
MWIX 5.2.1986 Time allowed for presenting expert witness by the prosecution was fifteen days from 22111986 to 4121986.
M.W.X 6121986 to 2.2.87 to 421987.
Time allowed for prosecution to produce MW-X was one month 25 days ie, from 7121986 to 1287.
The first witness for defence was examined on 7287 and the enquiry was adjourned to 10287.
The charged officer could not produce his witness and, therefore, his representative asked for some more time.
That request was rejected very unjustly by the Enquiry Officer.
The following is the enquiry proceedings held on 10287 :  "ENQUIRY PROCEEDINGS DT. 10287 at HYDERABAD.
PRESENT : S/Sri B Someswara Rao-Inquiring Authority (IA) K. Syama Sundara Prasad-Presenting Officer.
P Jayachandra Rao-Charged official.
P Subba Rao-Defence representative.
IA : The defence to produce the next witness.
DR : As the witnesses are not available, I request to allow some more time.
IA : As the enquiry proceedings are adjourned on two occasions earlier at the request of the defence and also at the request of the charged official and the defence representative the venue of the enquiry is shifted to Hyderabad to enable them to present their witness, further postponement of the case is not allowed.
The request of the DR for further time is allowed.
IA : Please let me know whether Sri P Jayachandra Rao is being examined as defence witness.
DR : No. IA : Please let me know whether any other witnesses are being produced in defence.
DR : Though we prepare to produce some more witnesses, as the time was not allowed and the proposed witnesses are at present not available, the request was to allow for some time.
IA : The charged official has been provided with sufficient time and opportunity to produce the witnesses in defence.
As already explained no further time could be allowed."
The action of the Enquiry Officer in refusing the legitimate request of the petitioner for some more time to produce his witnesses had undoubtedly disabled the petitioner from adducing evidence in support of his plea of innocence which, I must hold, is violative of principles of natural justice.
Had some reasonable time been granted to the petitioner he would have brought witnesses in support of his plea of innocence in respect of the charges.
14.
Dealing with a similar situation in which an Enquiry Officer declined the request of the charged officer for time to produce witnesses, the Supreme Court in State of UP v. CS Sharma, AIR 1968 SC 158 at 161 paras 8 and 9, held :  "This commission in our judgment was sufficient to vitiate the whole proceeding because no enquiry of this type in which there are charges of a criminal nature, can be said to be properly conducted when the defence of the officer is either frustrated or ruled out ......
It is possible that if a date had been fixed, he would not only have led evidence with regard to the car, but would have brought witnesses to clear himself of other charges, but no such opportunity was clearly afforded to him."
The above observations apply on all fours to the case on hand.
15.
When the hand-writing expert M.W.9, SK Jain was produced as a witness before the Enquiry Officer, the defence representative requested for permission to engage a counsel to cross-examine the expert stating that :  ".......only an advocate who by virtue of his experience in handling the expert witnesses can do justice.
A hand-writing expert or for that matter any other technical expert cannot be considered an expert in cross-examination.
In view of this I request the IA (Inquiry Authority) to permit us to engage a lawyer/advocate whose charges also may be paid by the Bank as per eligibility."
This request was rejected by the Enquiry Officer observing :  "In terms of Regulation 68(2)(vii) engaging a legal practitioner by the officer is prohibited and to my knowledge there is no amendment to the said Regulation."
After the chief examination of the report was over half an hour time was given to the defence representative to cross-examine the expert.
The defence representative requested one week's time to prepare for the cross-examination.
That request was rejected by the Enquiry Officer stating :  "The request of the DR is overruled.
The defence representative is advised to take up cross-examination of MW IX."
The attitude exhibited by the Enquiry Officer was anything but fair.
The defence representative was an Officer of the Bank and he was not an expert.
The hand-writing expert M.W.9 was a veteran with thirty years of experience to his credit.
He was Government Examiner of questioned documents.
It is impossible for a lay person to cross-examine a hand-writing expert.
Only a trained lawyer with experience in cross-examination can effectively cross-examine the expert M.W.9.
Further, the presenting officer was an experienced person who according to the petition :  ".......had been specially trained to conduct disciplinary enquiries.
He attended several training programmes and conducted several enquiries as prosecution officer.
He has also functioned as Inquiring Authority in several cases and was fully familiar with the relevant law and rules.
He can reasonably be described as a trained prosecutor."
This assertion appears to be true.
A lay officer untrained in the technicalities of adducing evidence and cross-examining the witnesses cannot discharge his functions effectively when pitted against a trained prosecutor.
A similar question fell for consideration before the Supreme Court in CL Subramaniam v. Collector of Customs, Cochin, AIR 1972 SC 2178 at 2180 para 13.
His Lordship Hegde, J speaking for the court held :  "The grievance of the appellant was that he was pitted against a trained prosecutor and not that Sivaraman was a legal practitioner.
The Disciplinary Authority did not consider that grievance.
It brushed aside the request of the appellant on the ground that Sivaraman was not a legal practitioner, a consideration which was not relied on by the appellant.
The grounds urged by the appellant in support of his request for permission to engage a legal practitioner were by no means irrelevant.
The fact that the case against the appellant was being handled by a trained prosecutor was a good ground for allowing the appellant to engage a legal practitioner to defend him lest the scales should be weighed against him.
The Disciplinary Authority completely ignored that circumstance."
I am unable to accept the contention of Shri Srinivasa Murthy that as no advocate was appointed to prosecute the case on behalf of the Bank the petitioner was not subjected to any disability by not having a legal practitioner to defend him.
The decision of the Supreme Court in Board of Trustees Port of Bombay v. Dilipkumar, AIR 1983 SC 109 relied upon by the Shri Srinivasa Murthy deals with a situation where the prosecution was represented by a legal practitioner but permission to engage a counsel was denied to the charged officer.
The Supreme Court rule that in such a situation the charged officer also must be permitted to have the services of a legal practitioner.
In the case on hand, although the presenting officer was not a legal practitioner, he appears to be a trained prosecutor and in the circumstances of the case refusal to permit the petitioner to have the services of a legal practitioner had seriously prejudiced his case and, therefore, the enquiry was vitiated due to violation of principles of natural justice.
16.
The report of the Enquiry Officer, it is not in dispute, was supplied to the petitioner only along with the order of dismissal.
The Regulations do not provide for a second show cause notice.
Even in respect of Government employees holding civil posts to whom the prosecution of Article 311 is available, it was held by the Supreme Court, in Kailash Chander v. State of UP, AIR 1988 SC 1338 at 1340 para 5, that failure to supply a copy of the enquiry officer's report would not afflict the order of punishment with any illegality.
Speaking for the Court His Lordship LM Sharma, J ruled :  "The question of service of copy of the report arose on account of right of a second show cause notice to the Government servant before the 42nd amendment and since present disciplinary proceeding was held later, the petitioner cannot legitimately demand a second opportunity.
That being the position, non-service of a copy of the report is immaterial."
The contention of Shri Anantha Babu in this regard, therefore, must fail.
17.
Shri Srinivasa Murthy contends that even if Charge No. 1 goes, on the ground of refusal of permission to the petitioner to engage an advocate before the Enquiry Officer, the findings in respect of the other two charges stand and, therefore, this court should not interfere with the punishment.
In support of this he placed reliance upon a decision of the Supreme Court in Pyare Lal Sharma v. Managing Director, J&K Industries Ltd, AIR 1989 SC 1854 at 1860 para 20.
His Lordship Kuldip Singh, J speaking for the Court held :  "Once it is established to the satisfaction of the authority that an employee remains on unauthorised absence from duty, the only action which can be taken is the termination of his services.
Similar is the case when an employee takes part in active politics.
The finding in the termination order regarding taking part in active politics cannot be sustained because no notice in this respect was given to Sharma but the order of termination can be supported on the ground of remaining unauthorised absence from duty.
This Court in State of Orissa v. Vidyabhushan Mohapatra (1963) Supp.
1 SCR 648 : AIR 1963 SC 779 and Railway Board v. Niranjan Singh (1969) 3 SCR 548 : AIR 1969 SC 966 has held that if the order can be supported on one ground for which the punishment can lawfully be imposed it is not for the courts to consider whether that ground alone would have weighed with the authority punishing the public servant.
Thus there is no force in this argument."
The above ruling has no application to the case on hand.
Violation of principles of natural justice permeate the entire gamut of all the charges.
The failure to supply a copy of the investigation report and the failure to give reasonable time to the petitioner to produce defence witnesses cannot be said to be confined to any particular charge.
The bias of the Enquiry Officer is clearly established.
While recording the evidence he had conducted himself in such a way as to cause reasonable apprehension in the mind of the petitioner that the enquiry would not be fair.
The following extracts from the Enquiry Proceedings indicate the bias of the Enquiry Officer.
"IA : I have noticed that the witness MW-I is deposing what he knew.
Further, there is no allergy for hearsay evidence in departmental enquiries; provided it has reasonable nexus and credibility.
However, whether the deposition of MW-I is hearsay or otherwise will be examined by me."
(He never examined this point later)  DR : I pray the IA not to prompt the witness and request him to note down whatever the witness deposed.
If any clarification need to be sought, may please be recorded.
IA : The opinion of the DR that I am prompting the witness is not correct.
I am ensuring in my words to the witness.
What he meant is recorded in the proceedings.
It is very much open for the witness to correct any thing which is different from what he meant to say.
M.W.
I may continue his deposition."
18.
The last contention urged by Sri Srinivasa Murthy is that the appellate order into which the order of dismissal passed by the second respondent was merged, has not been questioned and, therefore, even if the dismissal order passed by the second respondent is quashed, the appellate order will survive.
I cannot agree (See S.S. Rathore v. State of MP, AIR 1990 SC 10).
It is true that the original order gets merged with the appellate order.
When the writ petition was filed the petitioner had entertained a legitimate hope that by virtue of the judgment of this Court in W.P. No. 7398 of 1988 he would succeed on the ground of want of jurisdiction on the part of the second respondent to pass the order of dismissal.
After the writ petition was filed he preferred the appeal and during the pendency of the writ petition the appellate authority has passed the order confirming the order of dismissal.
He filed W.P.MP No. 12171 of 1989 to call for the records pertaining to the appellate order and quash the same.
Since that MP is allowed, I do not find any legitimate ground to sustain the present objection.
The legal infirmity attached to the original order of dismissal passed by the second respondent viz., breach of principles of natural justice, afflict the appellate order in equal measure.
19.
For the above reasons, the writ petition is allowed.
The order passed by the appellate authority dated 301188 in No. DPC.1757 confirming the order of the second respondent dated 16.11.87 is set aside.
This will not preclude the respondents from conducting a fresh enquiry against the petitioner in accordance with law.
But if they choose to do so they shall appoint an officer other than Sri B Someswara Rao an enquiring authority.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.