Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - Petitioner-workman has filed this writ petition for quashing the award (copy Annexure P-4) of the Labour Court dated 1051988.
2.
The facts which led to filing of the writ petition are that the petitioner was employed as Conductor by respondent No. 2 in the year 1950 with which he worked as such till 1491985 when his services were terminated without resorting to the prescribed procedure.
He raised a demand notice under Section 2-A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for short the Act) and when the State Government declined to make reference, the petitioner was impelled to file a writ petition in this Court.
The order impugned in that writ petition was quashed by this Court on 4121987 directing the State Government to reconsider the matter and pass an appropriate order.
It was in this background that the State Government made a reference under Section 10(1) of the Act for settlement of dispute between respondent No. 2 - management and the petitioner workman by order Annexure P-1.
3.
In reply to the claim petition, the respondent No. 2 - management, without disclosing the name of the partners, took up a plea that it was a partnership firm registered under the Partnership Act, so all the partners of the firm were its employer.
The reply to the claim petition was allegedly filed by the authorised representative of respondent No. 2 - management, which is Annexure P-3 to the writ petition.
The Labour Court held the reference to the incompetent and observed that the workman will be at liberty to raise a fresh industrial dispute.
Copy of the award is Annexure P-4 to the petition.
4.
The said award has been impugned in this petition on the grounds that the Labour Court has erred in not noticing the fact that the reference made by the Court was with respect to the management of respondent No. 2 and, therefore, the same could not be declined on the ground that respondent No. 2 was a registered partnership firm.
5.
It was urged by the counsel for the petitioner that the Labour Court did notice the fact that in reply to the demand notice the Manager of respondent No. 2 - management had appeared and filed the written statement.
6.
I have considered the submissions made at the Bar and perused the entire paper book.
7.
In this case the written statement was filed by an authorised representative for and on behalf of the management i.e. the M/s. Lahore Sargodha Transport Company, Malout.
The written statement could only be filed by express permission of the partner/partners.
It is settled principle of law that an act of a partner binds the other partners also.
In the written statement, the authorised representative has not only taken the legal objections but replied statements of claim on merits also.
In Shew Karan Agarwalla and another v. Satyanarain Mansinka, AIR 1978 Calcutta 495, it was held that the partnership firm under the provisions of the Partnership Act is the collective name of all partners so that contract between a partnership firm in firm's name with third party is, in law, a contract between the partners of the firm as its partners with such third party, even though partnership by itself is not a legal entity or corporate body.
Accordingly, the notice on the partnership firm, in firm's name determining the tenancy which was in the name of the firm duly served was held to be valid.
8.
It was further held that Order 30, Rule 1, CPC makes it permissible to file a suit by or to be sued in firm's name, not as a distinct legal entity but as a convenient mode of describing the partners to the time of accrual of the cause of action and the firm, as a party to the suit is merely a collective name of its partners and is really against all partners of the firm at the time of the cause of action though for institution of a suit by or on behalf of a firm, the firm must be registered under the Partnership Act.
9.
In the case in hand, it is not disputed that respondent No. 1 is a registered partnership concern and was duly served with a notice and reply on behalf of it, as stated in the aforesaid paras, was also filed.
The Industrial Disputes Act is a social legislation, the object of which is to provide justice to the aggrieved workmen and save them from exploitation at the hands of the employer.
In the instant case the relief to the petitioner has been denied on hyper-technical grounds, which to my mind, is against the object of the aforesaid legislation.
10.
For the foregoing reasons, the case is remanded back to the Labour Court with a direction to decide the reference on merits in accordance with law.
The parties through their counsel are directed to appear before the Labour Court on 22101990.
This petition is disposed of accordingly.
No costs.
Order accordingly.