Hemant Gupta, J - The petitioner claims appointment on compassionate ground on account of the fact that father of the petitioner has been declared medically unfit and retired from service on 27062003 on medical ground.
2.
The petitioner has challenged the legality of the Haryana Compassionate Assistance to Dependents of Deceased Government Employees Rules, 2003 (hereinafter referred to as the "2003 Rules"), on the ground that the said Rules have taken away the rights of the dependents of an employee who has been declared medically unfit, to seek appointment on compassionate ground.
3.
In case "Gurdevi v. State of Haryana and others, 2005(2) SCT 833 : 2005(2) PLR 516", similar claim of appointment on compassionate ground after the death of husband of the petitioner declared medically unfit for further service, was found to be unjustified in terms of 2003 Rules.
It was held to the following effect :-  "xx xx xx xx 4.
The aforesaid observations make it abundantly clear that High Court would not be justified in directing the appointment on compassionate ground as a matter of course.
The Supreme Court has clearly laid down in Umesh Nagpal's case that the Government or the public authority concerned has to examine the financial condition of the family of the deceased, and it is only if it is satisfied, that but for the provision of employment, the family will not be able to meet the crises, that a job is to be offered to the eligible member of the family.
It has also been held that the provision for employment even on the lowest post can only be justified in the form of relief against destitution.
It must also be framed (noticed ?)
that as against the destitute family of the deceased there are millions of other families which are equally, if not more destitute.
The consideration for such employment is not a vested right.
The object of offering employment on compassionate ground is only to enable the family to get over the financial crises which it faces at the time of the death of the sole breadwinner.
In view of the clear enunciation of the law by the Supreme Court, it would not be possible to hold that the petitioner has been denied the appointment arbitrarily or unreasonably.
The law laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of Umesh Nagpal (supra) has been reiterated in the case of Haryana State Electricity Board v. Naresh Tanwar and another, 1996(2) SCT 778 : 1996(8) SCC 23.
It has been reiterated that appointment on compassionate ground is an exception to the general rule of open recruitment, intended to make the immediate financial problem being suffered by the members of the family of the deceased employee.
As noticed earlier, the husband of the petitioner had been declared medically unfit.
He had been retired from service in accordance with the Statutory Service Rules.
He had been granted all the retiral benefits, presumably under the Rules.
Petitioner would not be entitled to any appointment on compassionate ground under the 2003 Rules, which have been framed under Article 309 of the Constitution of India, clearly.
xx xx xx" In view of the aforesaid judgment, we do not find any merit in the present petition which may warrant interference of this Court in exercise of writ jurisdiction.
The petition stands dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.