Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The authority of Baram Junior High School, Dakshin Dinajpur (it is submitted that at present it is a high school) has taken out the application (CAN 6120 of 2006) for vacation of interim order dated July 6th, 2006 made in the writ petition.
It is submitted that notice of the application was given.
However, none appears for the writ petitioner.
2.
Counsel for the school authority submits that before moving this writ petition the petitioner had moved an identical writ petition that was dismissed by me by an order dated July 5th, 2006.
He submits that if it is directed, the school authority shall publish the employment notice inviting applications for the post in question.
He agrees that since prior permission for filling the Group D vacancy had been granted before the statutory rules came into force the matter will be governed by the five judge bench decision of this Court given in the case of Rabindranath Mahato.
3.
I find that prior permission for making appointment to the post was given by the district inspector of schools concerned on May 20th, 2005.
The statutory recruitment rules came into force only in December, 2005.
In the five judge bench decision of this Court it was held that in a case such as this person not sponsored by employment exchanges would also be entitled to participate as candidates.
Here the petitioner alleged that since the employment notice was not published by the school authority, and since his name had not been sponsored by the employment exchange, he was not in a position to participate in the selection process, through according to the five judge bench decision of this Court he had a right to participate in the process.
4.
Since the school authority, as submitted by its counsel, has no objection to publishing an employment notice inviting applications from all eligible candidates, I think the writ petition itself should be disposed of giving direction for that.
In my view, though the matter is appearing under the heading application, final decision in the writ petition can be given, since the order will fully redress the grievance of the petitioner.
He was aggrieved by the fact that the employment notice was not published.
Now counsel for the school authority submits that the employment notice shall be published.
5.
For these reasons I dispose of both the writ petition and the application for vacation of interim order ordering that the school authority shall publish the employment notice inviting applications for the post for which the district inspector of schools accorded prior permission by order dated May 20th, 2005.
In the employment notice the terms and conditions regarding eligibility of the candidates and the last date for making application shall be mentioned.
Sufficient indication shall be given regarding age requirement and educational qualifications.
6.
The employment notice shall be a self-explanatory one and it shall be published in a Bengali daily widely circulated in the locality where the school is located.
It is further ordered that after applications in response to the employment notice are received, the school authority shall proceed with the selection process and that in that all the eligible candidates sponsored by the employment exchanges and applied in response to the employment notice shall be considered for the post in question.
The selection and appointment shall be made in accordance with the provisions of the relevant guidelines whereby the recruitment was to be governed.
7.
Advocate for the school authority is directed to communicate this order to the advocate for the petitioner and steps for that shall be taken immediately.
8.
There shall be no order for costs in the case.
9.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order, if applied for, shall be supplied to the parties within three days from the date of receipt of the file by the Section concerned.
Order accordingly.