Hemant Gupta, J - This order shall dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 18550 and 19529 of 2005, as common questions of law and facts arise in both the writ petitions.
However, for the sake of convenience facts are taken from Civil Writ Petition No. 18550 of 2005.
2.
The challenge in the present writ petition is to the order dated 17112005, whereby an application filed by the petitioner under Order 9 Rule 13 CPC was dismissed.
3.
On account of death of one Sher Singh, while digging the well on the land owned by the petitioner, his legal representatives filed an application under the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923 (for short `the Act') before the Commissioner under the Act.
The learned Commissioner passed an order on 362002 awarding a sum of Rs. 3,14,000/- as compensation.
The said award was passed ex-parte as none appeared for the petitioner inspite of the fact that the registered notices were sent to the petitioner.
4.
Subsequently, the petitioner moved an application on 892004 for setting aside of the award of determining the amount of compensation.
The said application has been dismissed.
It has been found that a registered letter was sent to the petitioner and another registered letter dated 262003 was sent after the final order was passed for depositing the amount of compensation, whereas the application for setting aside the ex parte order was typed on 2872004 and affidavit attested on 2972004 but the same was filed on 892004.
Thus, it was found that the application is without any merit.
5.
The writ petition came up for the hearing before this Court on 29.11.2005.
The writ petition was admitted and payment of compensation in excess of Rs. 1 lac was stayed.
An application has been filed by the legal heirs of deceased Sher Singh on the ground that the petitioner is playing every kind of trick to avoid his liability, and therefore, the stay granted by this Court be vacated.
6.
On 522007, the learned counsel for the petitioner had taken time to satisfy as the how the writ petition against the order passed by the Commissioner under the Act is maintainable as such order is appealable order.
7.
The sole argument raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner is that though the award rendered by the Commissioner under the Act is appealable, but the present writ petition is not directed against the award passed by the learned Commissioner but against the order dealing the setting aside of an ex parte order of determining of compensation.
The said order refusing to set aside the ex parte award is not appealable and, therefore, the writ petition is maintainable before this court.
8.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents has relied upon a Division Bench judgment of this court reported as Piara Singh v. Commissioner, Workmen Compensation under Workmen's Compensation Act, Patiala and another, 1987 Lab.IC 818, to contend that the Act is a welfare legislation meant to provide speedy remedy to the workmen for the injuries suffered by them in the course of their employment.
The Act has made provisions to entertain the appeal only on payment of compensation and that too on substantial question of law.
It is further contended that the order declining the application for setting aside the ex parte award is in fact an order maintaining the order awarding compensation and, therefore, such an order is appealable in terms of Section 30(1)(a) of the Act.
9.
Before proceeding further, it will be advantageous to refer to Section 30 of the Act, the provisions whereof read as under :-  "30.
Appeals.
- (1) An appeal shall lie to the High Court from the following orders of Commissioner, namely :- (a) an order as awarding as compensation a lump sum whether by way of redemption of a half-monthly payment or otherwise or disallowing a claim in full or in part for a lump sum;"  10.
Admittedly, an ex parte award was passed against the petitioner on 362002.
Such an award is undisputedly appealable in terms of Section 30(1)(a) of the Act.
An order passed on an application for setting aside of ex parte order is not an independent order.
The effect of such an order is that the order granting compensation is maintained.
Therefore, the said order would be appealable order.
If the contention of the petitioner is to be accepted, it will lead to anomalous results and will defeat the objects of the Act.
The said interpretation would be misused by the employers to bypass the provisions of the Act i.e. pre-deposit the amount of compensation in appeal and also without raising any substantial question of law.
Therefore, keeping in view the objects of the Act and to avoid anomalous results in providing different Forums for redressal of the grievances, it is held that the order refusing to set aside of an ex parte order is an appealable order.
11.
In view thereof, the present writ petitions are not maintainable.
The same are dismissed as such.
However, it is made clear that the petitioner is at liberty to seek his remedy in accordance with law.
Petition dismissed.