We have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner at length and perused the paper-book.
2.
Initially, the matter with regard to selection of a Principal of respondent No. 3-College was decided by the State of Punjab by order dated 15.6.2006 (Annexure P-6).
This order was passed by the Secretary, Government Punjab, Department of Technical Education & Industrial Training, pursuant to the directions issued by this Court on 24.1.2006 in CWP No. 17762 of 2005 (Manjit Kumar Khosla v. State of Punjab and others).
The Secretary was of the opinion that respondent No. 6 was not eligible to be appointed on the post of Principal as he had only 1-1/2 years regular service on the post of Head of Department, while the petitioner and one S.P.S.
Khurana possessed more than 5 years of regular service as Head of Department.
This order was not implemented by the respondent No. 3-College which prompted the petitioner to file CWP No. 13191 of 2006.
The aforesaid writ petition was disposed of by this Court on 2282006 with a direction to the respondents to dispose of the representation submitted by the petitioner for implementation of the order passed by the Secretary on 15.6.2006, by passing a speaking order within a period of one month of the receipt of a certified copy of the order.
Consequently, the respondent-College has now passed a speaking order on 23.9.2006 (Annexure P-9).
The claim of the petitioner has again been rejected by the respondent-College and respondent No. 6 has been selected and appointed as the Principal.
3.
In the impugned order (Annexure P-9), the respondent-College has held that the order passed by the State Government on 15.6.2006 was erroneous as it had been passed on the basis that respondent No. 6 did not possess the requisite 5 years experience at the level of the Head of Department.
It has been pointed out that respondent No. 6 has been working as Head of Department (Electrical) with effect from 6.9.1993 till his regular orders as Head of Department were issued with effect from 2762004.
In the eligibility conditions, it has been laid down that for appointment on the post of Principal, the incumbent must possess 15 years' teaching experience out of which at least five years should be at the level of the Head of the Department.
Furthermore, in the eligibility conditions so prescribed by the State Government, there was no distinction between the experience gained whether on regular basis or on officiating/ad hoc basis etc.
Therefore, according to the respondent-College, the Secretary has misread the provisions by interpreting the same to mean that the experience as Head of Department should be on regular basis.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the view adopted by the Secretary is perfectly legal as officiating service cannot be taken into account for calculating the experience on the post of Head of Department.
In support of the contention, learned counsel relies on a Division Bench judgment of the Andhra Pradesh High Court in the case of Bovaiah and others v. District Cooperative Central Bank Ltd, Sangareddy and another, 1998(1) SLR 276.
In the aforesaid judgment, it has been held that in view of the facts and circumstances of that case, it has been held that any ad hoc appointment or officiation is purely a stop-gap arrangement made by placing an official in the post higher than which he is holding.
Therefore, in the absence of any rule or regulation it will not confer any benefit.
Such an officiation also cannot be counted for seniority.
5.
We have considered the submissions made by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
There is no dispute with the proposition of law laid down by the Division Bench in the case of Bovaiah (supra).
However, the facts and circumstances of the present case are clearly distinguishable.
The service rendered by respondent No. 6 on the post of Head of Department from 6.9.1993 to 2762004 cannot be completely wiped off.
Such a long period of service on a particular post can hardly be termed as officiating or ad hoc or stop-gap arrangement.
It must also be noticed that the appointment of respondent No. 6 which has continued since 6.9.1993 has furctified into a regular appointment on 2762004.
Thus, respondent No. 6 has continuously worked on the post of Head of Department.
We are of the considered opinion that the respondent- College has correctly come to the conclusion that respondent No. 6 did possess the necessary experience of 5 years.
The respondent-College has also considered the second issue which was raised with regard to the binding nature of the order dated 15.6.2006 (Annexure P-6) passed by the Secretary.
It has been held that respondent-College is entitled to invoke the right guaranteed under Article 29(1) of the Constitution of India as it is recognized as a religious minority under Article 30(1) of the Constitution of India.
In support of the conclusion, the respondent-College has relied on the law laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of The State of Punjab v. Ramji Lal and others, AIR 1971 SC 1228.
The respondent-College was also aware about the reiteration of the law in the later judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of TMA Pai Foundation and others v. State of Karnataka and others, 2003(2) SCT 385 (SC) : JT 2002(9) SC 1.
In view of the above, we are of the considered opinion that the order dated 23.9.2006 (Annexure P-9) passed by the respondent-College cannot be said to be either arbitrary, erroneous or illegal.
Consequently, we find no merit in the writ petition and the same is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.