Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The writ petitioner's grievance is that the respondent bank has wrongfully decided not to grant him the benefits of pension in terms of the scheme.
2.
On December 1st, 1947 he was appointed as a clerk in the respondent bank (Central Bank of India).
On reaching the age of superannuation he was to retire with effect from March 31st, 1986.
However, before he reached the age of superannuation, the disciplinary authority had dismissed him from service by an order dated March 25th, 1986; appeal preferred by him was rejected by order dated July 8th, 1986.
3.
Challenging the orders of the disciplinary and appellate authorities he moved this Court by filing a writ petition on which Civil Rule No. 10876 (W) of 1986 was issued.
By judgment and order dated April 7th, 1989 Mohitosh Mazumder, J (as he then was) was pleased to allow the writ petition.
The respondent bank preferred an appeal (FMAT No. 1331 of 1989, subsequently renumbered as FMA No. 1131 of 1994), and the division bench by judgment and order dated November 13th, 1992 dismissed the appeal and directed the bank to pay him all benefits.
Consequently he was deemed to be reinstated in service, and all benefits were given by the bank treating him superannuated from service with effect from March 31st, 1986.
4.
On October 29th, 1993 the bank reached a settlement with the unions of the officers and workmen.
The settlement was that a pension scheme for the employees and officers of the bank would be introduced with retrospective effect from January 1st, 1986.
Accordingly, Central Bank Employees' (Pension) Regulations, 1993 were notified.
There is no dispute that under the 1993 regulations the petitioner was eligible to opt for pension, since the scheme was to take effect from January 1st, 1986, at which date he was in employment.
5.
On June 17th, 1994 he wrote a letter to the branch manager of the bank regarding his option for pension.
Contents of the letter are :  "With regard to above I like to inform you that on 8.6.1974 I wanted from you necessary forms in writing for letter of option for pension as a retired officer of the Bank but I refused to have any form on the plea that my loan a/cs have not been adjusted due to non-receipt of credit advice from Calcutta Zonal Office.
I paid entire amount of my dues to the Bank as per judgment dated 13.11.92 of Hon'ble High Court, Calcutta in my favour.
I also received money from the Bank as my retirement benefits on 27493.
I failed to understand how my loan a/cs still remain unadjusted though a period of one year passed and due to fault of the management I am suffering from problem.
Please acknowledge receipt of the forms.
With best regards".
There is no dispute that his letter dated June 17th, 1994 alongwith its enclosures was received by the bank.
Thereafter on January 6th, 1995 he applied for commutation of pension under the 1993 regulations, and he made such application in connection with his letter dated June 17th, 1994.
There is no dispute that this application was also received by the bank.
When the things developed up to the stage as noted above, the 1995 regulations, called Central bank of India Employees (Pension) Regulations, 1995 were notified.
After these regulations come into force, he did not exercise any fresh option for getting pension.
6.
The respondents totally ignored his letter dated June l7th, 1994 and application dated January 6th, 1995.
He also became silent.
After long silence he took out this writ petition dated September 27th, 2004; it was admitted by order dated October 14th, 2004 when pleas of delay and availability of alternative remedy raised by the respondent bank were rejected.
The bank has filed counter to which reply has been filed by the petitioner.
7.
Advocate for the respondents contends that, in view of the division bench judgment and order passed in appeal on November 13th, 1992, the petitioner is not entitled to claim the pensionary benefits, since it would be deemed that his right, if any, had been waived by him by agreeing to accept, and then by actually accepting, the retirement benefits.
In support of his contention he relies on the Supreme Court decision in Krishna Bahadur v. Purna Theatre & Ors., (2004) 8 SCC 229.
In response advocate for the petitioner argues that there was no question of waiving the right of which no indication was available to the petitioner at the date of disposal of the appeal.
8.
I am unable to appreciate the Contention of advocate for the respondents.
At the date of disposal of the appeal there was no existence of the pension scheme.
There was nothing from which the petitioner could identify his right to claim pension, and also his right of recession or waiver of such right to pension, since the scheme was not introduced at that time.
He could not have waived a non-existing right.
9.
Advocate for the petitioner contends that right of the petitioner to receive pension accrued, once option for it was exercised by him in terms of the 1993 settlement.
He refers me to the 1995 regulations, regn.
3(9) relevant portion of which reads :-  "Notwithstanding anything contained in sub regulations (i), (ii), (iii), (v) and (viii) an option exercised before the notified date by an employee or the family of a deceased employee in pursuance of the settlement shall be deemed to be an option for the purpose of this chapter if such employee or the family of the deceased employee refunded within 60 days from the notified date the amount of the bank's contribution to the provident fund including interests accrued thereon together with a further simple interest in accordance with the provisions of this chapter........"  He argues that since the petitioner submitted option in terms of the 1993 regulations, there was no necessity for him to submit fresh option under the 1995 regulations.
To this advocate for the respondents says that the option exercised by the petitioner in June 1994 was in vacuum, because a right or an occasion to exercise the option could not accrue or arise before the 1995 regulations were notified.
10.
I asked advocate for the petitioner if the option exercised by the petitioner was a valid one, since conditions of regn.
3(9) were not fulfilled in that the petitioner did not deposit the employer's contribution to the provident fund with interest.
Advocate for the petitioner has answered by saying that there was no occasion for the petitioner to refund the employer's contribution to the provident fund with interest, since the bank did not accept the option, and it also did not settle the amount that was to be refunded by the petitioner.
11.
In my view, it will not be correct to say that the petitioner's option exercised by him under cover of his letter dated June 17th, 1994 was not entertainable on the ground that it had been exercised before the 1995 regulations came into force.
I think, subject to fulfillment of conditions of regn.
3(9) of the 1995 regulations, the bank was under an obligation to treat the petitioner's such option as a valid option.
I am of such view for the reason that provisions of regn.
3(9) of the 1995 regulations specifically referred to options exercised in terms of the previous 1993 regulations.
12.
But, it seems, the real question before me is whether the petitioner's option exercised on June 17th, 1995 was to be considered a valid option by the bank under the 1995 regulations.
13.
The admitted fact is that the employer's contribution to the provident fund was not refunded by the petitioner with interest, though validity of his option was dependent on this.
He received his provident fund moneys (which included the employer's contribution) before the 1995 regulations came into force.
To my mind, his obligation to refund such contribution was not dependent on any decision to be taken by the bank for determining the refundable amount.
The 1994 option exercised by him would have become a lawfully exercised option only on his fulfilling the conditions imposed by provisions of regn.
3(9) regarding refund of the employer's contribution to the provident fund.
14.
On the facts of the case, I am constrained to hold that the petitioner wilfully neglected to comply with the conditions imposed by regn.
3(9) regarding refund.
After January 1995 when he applied for commuted value of pension he did not take any step whatsoever for informing his decision to the bank regarding compliance with the conditions imposed by regn.
3(9).
On the contrary, he slept over the matter for a long period, and only in September 2004 he chose to approach this Court with the grievance that pensionary benefits were not given to him inspite of exercising the option for the same in the year 1994.
His conduct leads me to an irresistible conclusion that he consciously decided not to comply with the provisions of regn.
3(9).
15.
I am unable to see any force in the contention that since the amount payable to the bank can be deducted from the petitioner's commuted value of pension, the benefit should not be refused to him.
This was not the idea of regn.
3(9) that dealt with the aspects required for making an option exercised in the past a valid and lawful option under the 1995 regulations.
In my understanding of the regulation, it specifically provided that option exercised prior to the notification of the 1995 regulations was to be regarded as a valid option only on fulfillment of the conditions imposed by it.
16.
The further conditions imposed by regn.
3(9), to my mind, cannot be separated from the question of validity of an option exercised by an employee, when an interpretation is always to be given to such a regulation that even an eligible employee would not be entitled to the pensionary benefits, in the absence of a duly exercised option, and when the Court also cannot extend the time for exercising the option.
It seems to me that such a regulation needs strict interpretation, and in the absence of any specific provision for relaxation there is no scope to presume existence of power and authority to relax any of the provisions.
17.
On these facts, I must say that the petitioner proceeded with his option half way, and his conduct shows that he abandoned the idea of getting the pension after January 1995.
These being the factual and legal positions, I am unable to feel persuaded into granting any relief to the petitioner.
18.
For these reasons I am compelled to dismiss the writ petition, which is hereby dismissed.
In the facts and circumstances of the case, I am not inclined to make any order for costs in it.
19.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this judgment and order shall be supplied to the parties, if applied for.
Petition dismissed.