SS Nijjar, J. (Oral) - On promotion from HCMS Class-II to HCMS Class-I, the petitioners have been placed in functional scale of Rs. 3000-4500 plus NPA after 5 years of regular service and the Selection Grade of Rs. 4100-4300.
Prior to the promotion, the petitioners were already in the scale of Rs. 4100-5300.
However, on ground of higher responsibility, on promotion from Class-II to Class-I, the petitioners were granted one additional increment to compensate for the higher responsibility.
The aforesaid additional increment was granted to the petitioners on different dates of promotion.
The aforesaid additional increment has been withdrawn by identical orders issued on different dates.
The order withdrawing the increment in case of petitioner No. 1 is dated 22112000 (Annexure P-8).
In the aforesaid order, it has been stated that the petitioner had been granted benefit of one increment in the grade of Rs. 4100-5300 by Office Order dated 1821998 as his pay-scale had been fixed in the aforesaid scale w.e.f.
151989 on completion of 12 years service.
The Haryana Government has issued a clarification dated 672000 that the benefit of stepping up of pay to those doctors who were working in the pay-scale of Rs. 4100-4300 and were drawing the senior scale of Rs. 4100-5300 on their promotion as SMO was not justified.
In view of the aforesaid clarification, the increment granted to the petitioner No. 1 was withdrawn w.e.f.
16.5.1989.
This has resulted in the reduction of the salary of the petitioner.
The respondents have also ordered recovery of the excess amount allegedly paid.
2.
Mr. Chopra, learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the aforesaid order is liable to be quashed on the short ground that it has been passed without granting any opportunity of hearing to the petitioner.
The respondents have filed a written statement.
In reply to the submissions made by the petitioners, it is stated that the impugned orders are self-speaking.
The earlier pay fixation orders were wrong and the same have been rectified on the advice of the Finance Department, Haryana, dated 2662000.
It is not disputed that the pay of the petitioners has been reduced.
It is also not disputed that the respondents had ordered recovery from the pay of the petitioners of the excess amount allegedly paid.
3.
Ms. Monga, learned State counsel, however, submits that since the pay has been re-fixed on the basis of the clarification, it would not be necessary to grant an opportunity of hearing to the petitioners.
4.
I am unable to accept the submissions made by the learned counsel for the State of Haryana.
It is a settled principle of law that any order, which would cause adverse civil consequences cannot be passed without observing rules of natural justice.
This view of mine will find support from a judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of SL Kapoor v. Jagmohan and others, 1986 RRR 341 : AIR 1981 Supreme Court 136.
In the aforesaid case, considering a similar proposition, the Supreme Court has observed as follows :-  "19.
Megarry J discussed the question in John v Rees, (1970)1 Ch 345.
He said (at p. 402) : "It may be that there are some who would decry the importance which the Courts attach to the observance of the rules of natural justice.
When something is obvious, they may say, `why force everybody to go through the tiresome waste of time involved in framing charges and giving an opportunity to be heard ?
The result is obvious from the start'.
Those who take this view do not think, do themselves justice.......... 20.
In Annamunthodo v. Oilfields Workers' Trade Union, (1961)3 All ER 621 (HL), Lord Denning, in his speech said (at p. 625) :  "Counsel for the respondent union did suggest that a man could not complain of a failure to natural justice unless he could show that he had been prejudiced by it.
Their Lordships cannot accept this suggestion.
If a domestic tribunal fails to act in accordance with natural justice, the person affected by their decision can always seek redress in the Courts.
It is a prejudice to any man to be denied justice."
21.
In Margarite Fuentes et al.
v. Robert L Shevin, (1972)32 L Ed 2D 556, it was said (at p. 574) : "But even assuming that the appellants had fallen behind in their instalment payments, and that they had no other valid defences, that is immaterial here.
The right to be heard does not depend upon an advance showing that one will surely prevail at the hearing.
To one who protests against he taking of his property without due process of law, it is no answer to say that in his particular case due process of law would have led to the same result because he had no adequate defence upon the merits."
24.
.....
In our view the principles of natural justice know of no exclusionary rule dependent on whether it would have made any difference if natural justice had been observed.
The non-observance of natural justice is itself prejudice to any man and proof of prejudice independently of proof of denial of natural justice is unnecessary.
It ill comes from a person who has denied justice that the person who has been denied justice is not prejudiced.
As we said earlier where on the admitted or indisputable facts only one conclusion is possible and under the law only one penalty is permissible, the Court may not issue its writ to compel the observance of natural justice, not because it is not necessary to observe natural justice but because Courts do not issue futile writs.
We do not agree with the contrary view taken by the Delhi High Court in the judgment under appeal."
5.
In the present case, no opportunity whatsoever has been given to the petitioners to show that they were entitled to the additional increment.
Their pay has been reduced, even recovery from their salaries has been ordered.
Such an order would clearly fall within the definition of an order causing civil consequences.
It can only be passed after observing rules of natural justice.
Consequently, the impugned order (Annexure P-8) and the other identical orders issued in the case of other petitioners are hereby quashed.
The respondents shall be at liberty to pass fresh orders in accordance with law after giving due opportunity of hearing to the petitioners, if so advised.
Petition allowed.