GS Singhvi, J - This appeal is directed against order dated 30.3.1994 passed by the learned Single Judge dismissing Civil Writ Petition No. 3259 of 1989 filed by the appellants in the matter of re-fixation of their pay in the grade of Rs. 700-1200.
2.
During the course of hearing, Shri Jaswant Singh, learned Senior Deputy Advocate General, Haryana very fairly stated that the Court may remand the case to the State Government/competent authority for deciding the issue relating to refixation of the pay of the appellants after giving them notice and opportunity of hearing.
3.
The facts on which there is no dispute between the parties are that the appellants joined service in the Public High School, Juan (Sonepat) and Haryana High School, Sonepat.
Those schools were taken over by the State Government in the years 1980 and 1984 respectively.
For this purpose, sanction of the Governor was conveyed by the Secretary to Government of Haryana, Education Department to the Director Public Instructions, Haryana vide memo dated 2721980 and by the Commissioner and Secretary to Government Haryana, Education Department to the Director School Education, Haryana (respondent No. 2) vide memo dated 2541984.
All the appellants fulfilled the qualifications for appointment as teachers in the government service and, therefore, they were absorbed and appointed as teachers in the Government Schools on the terms and conditions as laid down in Haryana Government Education Directorate letter dated 781984.
A copy of the order of appointment dated 2421986 issued by respondent No. 2 has been placed on record as Annexure P-7.
Their pay was fixed in the grade of Rs. 700-1200 in HES-III (Non-gazetted) School Cadre (Man Branch).
After a gap of about one year, respondent No. 2 vide his letter dated 841987 directed the District Education Officer, Sonepat to re-fix the pay of the appellants and withdraw the benefit of fixation granted earlier.
This was done by him apparently in view of instructions issued by the Government of Punjab vide memo dated 1141965 which were adopted by the Government of Haryana and also reiterated vide memo dated 11111966, a copy of which is Annexure R-1 with the written statement.
The appellants represented against the revision of their pay but without examining the same, respondent No. 2 sent letter dated 30.9.1988 to the District Education Officer, Sonepat to recover the alleged excess amount paid to the appellants.
4.
The appellants challenged the re-fixation of their pay, consequential reduction of salary payable to them and recovery of the excess amount allegedly paid to them on the ground of violation of the conditions of sanction and the rules of natural justice.
5.
In their written statement, the respondents defended the re-fixation of pay of the appellants by asserting that this had to be done keeping in view of the conditions of the gift deed executed by the Management of private schools with the Government.
6.
On a consideration of the pleadings of the parties and hearing argument of their counsel, the learned Single Judge came to the conclusion that re- fixation of appellants pay had been done in accordance with the instructions issued by the State Government and that the appellants were not entitled to fixation of their pay as per the Government rules.
7.
We have heard Shri R.K. Malik, learned counsel for the appellants and Shri Jaswant Singh, learned Senior Deputy Advocate General.
It is an admitted position that before directing the District Education Officer to re-fix the pay of the appellants and make recovery of the excess amount paid to them, respondent No. 2 did not give any action-oriented notice or opportunity of hearing to them.
Thus, the infraction of the rule of audi alteram partem is writ large on the face of the record.
The applicability of the rules of natural justice in purely administrative matters was unequivocally recognised by the Supreme Court in State of Orissa v. Dr. (Miss) Binapani Dei and others, AIR 1967 SC 1269 in the following words :-  "An order by the State to the prejudice of a person in derogation of his vested rights may be made only in accordance with the basic rules of justice and fairplay.
The deciding authority, it is true, is not in the position of a Judge called upon the decide an action between contesting parties, and strict compliance with the forms of judicial procedure may not be insisted upon.
He is, however, under a duty to give the person against whom an enquiry is held an opportunity to set up his version or defence and an opportunity to correct or to controvert any evidence in the possession or the authority which is sought to be relied upon to his prejudice.
For that purpose the person against whom an enquiry is held must be informed of the case he is called upon to meet, and the evidence in support thereof.
The rule that a party to whose prejudice an order is intended to be passed is entitled to a hearing applies alike to judicial tribunals and bodies of persons invested with authority to adjudicate upon matters involving civil consequences.
It is one of the fundamental rules of our constitutional set-up that every citizen is protected against exercise of arbitrary authority by the State or its officers.
Duty to act judicially would therefore, arise from the very nature of the function intended to be performed; it need not be shown to be super- added.
If there is power to decide and determine to the prejudice of a person, duty to act judicially is implicit in the exercise of such power.
If the essentials of justice be ignored and an order to the prejudice of a person is made, the order is a nullity.
That is a basic concept of the rule of law and importance thereof transcends the significance of a decision in any particular case."
"It is true that the order is administrative in character, but even an administrative order which involves civil consequences, as already stated, must be made consistently with the rules of natural justice after informing the first respondent of the case of the State, the evidence in support thereof and after giving an opportunity to the first respondent of being heard and meeting or explaining the evidence."
8.
In Sayeedur Rehman v. The State of Bihar and others, A.I.R. 1973 SC 239, the Supreme Court held as under :-  "This unwritten right of hearing is fundamental to a just decision by any authority which decides a controversial issue affecting the rights of the rival contestants.
This right has its roots in the notion of fair procedure.
It draws the attention of the party concerned to the imperative necessity of not overlooking the other side of the case before coming to its decision, for nothing is more likely to conduce to just and right decision than the practice of giving hearing to the affected parties.
The omission of express requirement of fair hearing in the rules or other source of power claimed for reconsidering an order is supplied by the rule of justice which is considered as an integral part of our judicial process which also governs quasi-judicial authorities when deciding controversial points affecting rights of the parties."
9.
By applying the ratio of the aforementioned judgments to the facts of this case, we hold that re-fixation of appellants `pay and consequential' recovery of the excess amount paid to them is vitiated due to violation of the rules of natural justice.
10.
In view of the above conclusion, we do not consider it necessary to deal with other points decided by the learned Single Judge, and feel the entire matter should be left to be independently decided by the competent authority.
11.
In the result, the appeal is allowed.
The order of the learned Single Judge is set aside.
Consequently, the writ petition of the appellants shall stand allowed and re-fixation of their pay nullified.
However, we give liberty to the Director School Education, Haryana and competent authority to pass a fresh order in the matter of fixation of pay of the appellants after giving them notice and effective opportunity of hearing and by passing a speaking order.
It is expected that the concerned authority will pass appropriate orders within six months from the date of presentation or receipt or a copy of this order.
Appeal allowed.