Jasbir Singh, J (Oral) - Petitioner has filed this writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India praying for issuance of an appropriate writ, order or direction to the respondents to give him all the benefits of seniority, promotion etc. wef.
the date his juniors, in service were given that benefit.
It is case of the petitioner that he was appointed as a Master in the month of April, 1958.
Thereafter, he joined Indian Army as an Emergency Commissioned Officer, when he was working in Government High School, Rajond, district Karnal, now in district Jind.
His lien was kept intact with the Education Department.
Petitioner was relieved from the Army on March 31, 1970, and again joined as a Social Study Master in Government Middle School, Ferozepur, district Ambala.
He was promoted as Headmaster in the month of August, 1970.
He was relieved from the duty of Headmaster in the month of August, 1975, and was again appointed as a Social Study Master without any reason what-so-ever He then made many representations with a prayer that he be assigned proper seniority, keeping in view his initial appointment and he be promoted accordingly wef.
the date of promotion of his juniors.
His representation was looked into by the competent authority and vide letter dated August 2, 1979, following order was communicated :-  "2.
Government has accepted the representation of Sukhdiyal Singh Master.
So it is requested that the official may be promoted from the date, junior Master to him was promoted on the post of Headmaster.
Please inform if a post is available in the department for this official, if the post is not available then a proposal for creating a temporary post may be sent to Government immediately.
3.
Promotion orders of the official may be issued immediately and thereafter if necessary pleas send a proposal for creating supernumerary post to the Government."
Thereafter department failed to take any action as contemplated vide letter Annexure P-3.
Petitioner again approached the department but without any result and ultimately he filed this writ petition.
2.
Upon notice, respondents put up their appearance and filed written statement, wherein it is stated that a committee was constituted and as per recommendations, benefit of promotion was given to the petitioner from September 25, 1970 to September 11, 1979.
However, it was directed that no arrears of pay etc. be paid to him.
3.
Shri SP Laler, Advocate, for the petitioner states that so far as other grievances of the petitioner are concerned, these stand satisfied in view of the orders (Annexures R-III and R-IV) both dated July 31, 1987.
He states that only grievance of the petitioner which now remains is regarding non-payment of arrears for the period September 25, 1970 to September 11, 1979.
He states that promotion was declined to the petitioner without any justification.
He was not at fault and under these circumstances, once it is found to be a case of retrospective promotion, arrears of pay cannot be declined to him.
To support his contention, he has placed reliance upon a Division Bench judgment of this Court in C.W.P.
No. 13456 of 1997 (Avtar Singh v. State of Haryana and another), rendered on December 1, 1997.
Shri Laler prays that the respondents be directed to make payment of arrears of pay along with interest to the petitioner.
4.
This prayer has vehemently been opposed by Shri Sudhir Nehra, AAG, Haryana, on the ground that since the petitioner had not actually worked on the post, he is not entitled to any arrears of pay for that period.
5.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, this Court feels that the stand taken by the State is not justified.
It is apparent from the document (Annexure P-3) that promotion, on due date, was wrongly declined to the petitioner.
It is apparent from the records that on receipt of his representation, it was decided by the competent authority to promote him from the date of promotion of his juniors.
It is also coming out from the records that before passing the orders (Annexures P-3, R-III and R-IV), petitioner had actually worked as a Headmaster from September 17, 1970 to August 27, 1975.
Even for that period, nothing was paid to him.
He was directed to perform his duties as a Headmaster in his own pay scale of a Master.
A Division Bench of this Court in Avtar Singh's case (supra), after noticing similar arguments, opined as under :  "Notice of motion was issued.
Reply has been filed.
In the written- statement, it has been mentioned that the petitioner was erroneously not promoted with effect from 791987.
In other words, the respondents admit their fault for not promoting the petitioner with effect from the due date.
We are of the view that in such circumstances if for no fault of the incumbent, he is not promoted and is deprived to work on that promoted post, he cannot be denied the pay of the promoted post, when he is promoted retrospectively with effect from the due date.
A Division Bench of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 11749 of 1996, titled Krishan v. Haryana State Federation of Consumers Wholesale Stores and another, 1997(1) S.C.T.
686, decided on 10121996 and another Division Bench in Sudershan Kumar v. State of Haryana and another, 1997(2) SCT 278 (P&H) : 1997(2) RSJ 416, in similar circumstances held that the incumbent is entitled to the arrears of pay.
Following the aforesaid judgments, we allow this writ petition and quash the order Annexured P/3 and direct the respondents to release the arrears of the petitioner with effect from the date of his retrospective promotion.
The arrears be released to the petitioner within a period of three months.
In case the arrears are not released as aforesaid, the petitioner would be entitled to interest thereof at the rate of 12% per annum."
6.
This Court feels that case of the petitioner is squarely covered by the ratio of judgment in Avtar Singh's case (supra).
Petitioner's promotion was due as on September 25, 1970.
That right was declined to him without any justification and without any fault on his part.
Under these circumstances, petitioner is held entitled to arrears of pay etc. for the period falling between September 25, 1970 to September 11, 1979 of the post of Headmaster along with simple interest at the rate of 8% per annum.
Writ petition stands allowed to the extent indicated above.
Petition allowed.