Swatanter Kumar, J - Petitioner was appointed as driver in Haryana Roadways on 1591977 where he continued to serve upto 20122000.
A charge-sheet was served upon the petitioner on 1591983.
Upon conclusion of the departmental enquiry, the competent authority passed an order of punishment dated 30121994 awarding punishment of stoppage of two annual increments with cumulative effect.
The pay and allowances for the suspension period were restricted to the subsistence allowance already drawn by the petitioner.
The petitioner preferred an appeal against the order of punishment.
Vide order dated 10121997 the Appellate Authority modified the order and reduced the punishment to warning only.
A representation was filed by the petitioner claiming full salary for the suspension period in view of the order of the Appellate Authority.
The representation dated 2442001 was rejected by the concerned authorities vide order dated 472001.
Relying upon the judgment of this Court in the case of YP Sehgal v. State of Punjab, 1992(1) SLR 583 : 1992(2) SCT 179 (P&H) the petitioner served a legal notice upon the respondents.
The prayer of the petitioner as made in the legal notice was also declined by the respondents vide order dated 2642002 giving rise to the filing of the present writ petition.
Thus, in this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner prays that the action of the respondents as contained in the order dated 2642002 be quashed and they be directed to pay full salary to the petitioner for the period 691983 to 1451984.
2.
The facts in the present writ petition are not in dispute.
The stand of the respondents is that the petitioner was held to be guilty of the article of charges.
It is only that the Appellate Authority had reduced the punishment to that of warning from stoppage of two increments with cumulative effect and petitioner as such is entitled to no other benefit except the one already granted by the respondents.
3.
We may notice that in response to the legal notice served by the petitioner upon the respondents, and in furtherance to the order passed on 2442001 in CWP No. 5747 of 2001 the competent authority has considered the matter and found no merit in the claim.
The order of rejection runs into three pages but reasoning-cum-operative part of the order is only contained in half a paragraph which reads as under :-  "I have gone through the order dated 2912002 passed by the Hon'ble High Court in CWP No. 1789/2002.
Regarding the grievance of the petitioner a detailed and speaking order had already been passed by the Transport Commissioner, Haryana on 572002.
Keeping in view of the above said reasons and circumstances there is no force in the legal notice dated 15102001 as Annexure P/1, hence legal notice served by the petitioner is hereby rejected."
4.
As is evident from the bare reading of the above, no reason, whatsoever, has been given for denying the claim of the petitioner.
This is despite the fact that in the legal notice served by the petitioner he had referred to the judgment of a Division Bench of this Court in the case of YP Sehgal (supra), did not consider it appropriate even to look into the said judgment.
5.
During the course of hearing learned counsel for the petitioner heavily relied upon a judgment of another Division Bench of this Court in the case of Sarwan Kumar v. State of Haryana and another, CWP No. 15778 of 1999, decided on 30102000 copy of which has been annexed to the writ petition as Annexure P/3.
The Division Bench held as under :-  "In the aforesaid decision of this Court in YP Sehgal's case, relied upon by the petitioner, it has been held that it is neither permissible in law nor fair to deny salary and allowances for the period of suspension if the delinquent has been awarded minor punishment of censure.
In the instant case, it is merely a warning issued to the petitioner.
Even otherwise, if on the basis of the order of the Transport Commissioner, the salary of the petitioner for the suspension period was to be with-held, he was required to have been issued a notice and given opportunity and in the absence of which action, the order on the face of it becomes arbitrary and violative of the principles of natural justice.
In the absence of any specific order in respect of with- holding the salary of the petitioner for the suspension period as is the case set out by him.
The direction of the punishing authority for treating the suspension period of the petitioner as leave of the kind due is against law.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to release the salary and other allowances in respect of the suspension period of the petitioner forthwith."
6.
There is no dispute to the fact that no notice was given to the petitioner separately before the disciplinary authority passed the order denying full salary to the petitioner for the period of suspension.
Secondly, the punishment awarded in this case is also that of warning only.
It was contended on behalf of the State that in the case of Sarwan Kumar (supra) the enquiry officer had found the petitioner not guilty of charges but the disciplinary authority while differing with the enquiry report, held the petitioner to be guilty of article of charges and imposed the punishment of warning.
As such the said judgment has no application to the facts of the present case.
7.
We are unable to understand this distinction.
In both the cases the disciplinary authority must necessarily record its conclusion that articles of charges were proved.
In the above mentioned cases, punishment of warning was imposed upon the delinquent officials.
It would no way create any distinction from the case afore-referred merely because the enquiry officer had held that article of charges was not proved.
We are of the considered view that the authorities concerned ought to have granted reasonable opportunity to the petitioner and consider the case of the petitioner in light of the law above referred.
No reason, whatsoever, has been stated in the impugned order by the authorities for rejecting the claim of the petitioner with otherwise is quite sustainable in law.
8.
For the reasons afore-stated, we set aside the order dated 2642002 Annexure P/4 and direct the respondents to pay the petitioner his salary for the period in question.
The writ petition is accordingly allowed, however, leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.