Swatanter Kumar, J - The petitioners who were engaged by the Haryana State Minor Irrigation Tubewell Corporation, hereinafter referred to as the Corporation, as the work-charged employees between 141970 to 2681982 and their services were regularised with effect from 141979 to 2681986.
As the petitioners had completed service of more than 8 and 18 years, they claim that they were entitled to the benefit of additional increments on completing 8 and 18 years of service in terms of the circular of the Government dated 161998.
This benefit was denied to the petitioners by the respondent- department on the plea that they had not completed the requisite number of years of service and the service rendered by them prior to their regularisation i.e. on work-charged basis cannot be counted for grant of such benefit.
Having failed to receive the benefit at the hands of the respondents, the petitioners have failed this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
2.
The respondents have contested the claim of the petitioners on the ground that the writ petition is not maintainable as no right of the petitioners has been infringed and that some of the petitioners have filed the writ petition praying for regularisation of their services being CWP No. 13198 of 1994 which is pending, as such this writ petition was liable to be rejected.
It is further stated that the work-charge service or ad hoc service rendered by an employee cannot be counted while granting the benefit of additional increments in terms of the circular of the Government dated 2081996, copy of which has been annexed by the petitioners themselves as Annexure P/3 to the writ petition.
The service which an employee is required to render has to be a regular service for the purposes of getting the benefit.
In fact the work charge employees by the very nomenclature of their service are not eligible for computing the continuous regular service in the cadre.
The respondents also rely upon the circular of the Government dated 3112001 wherein it has been reiterated that no benefit of work-charge service is to be given for the purposes of grant of higher standard pay scales.
The controversy in the present case is a very narrow one.
Whether the petitioners are entitled to have the work charge service rendered by them counted as total service rendered by them for the purposes of grant of benefit of 8/18 years of service as additional increments or not.
3.
The contention of the respondents that it is not a regular continuous service rendered by the petitioners has no merit.
This question is no more res-integra and stands fully settled by the judgment of this Court as well as the Hon'ble Apex Court.
In support of their claim, the petitioners have rightly placed great reliance on the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of State of Haryana and others v. Ravinder Kumar and others, Civil Appeal Nos. 5740-5741/1997, decided on 31102000, copy of which is annexed to the writ petition as Annexure P/5, wherein it has been held as under :-  "It is also not disputed by the learned counsel appearing for the State that this period which the employees have rendered as work charge basis count for the purpose of the increment in the cadre as well as the qualifying service for the pension.
We, therefore, see no justification in not counting their period for the purpose of giving additional increment on completion of 8 and 18 years of service as well as 10 and 20 years of the service for getting higher scale as per the Government circular, which obviously are intended to avoid stagnation in a particular grade.
In that view of the matter, we see no justification for our interference with the impugned order of the Punjab and Haryana High Court.
These appeals and SLPs.
accordingly stand dismissed."
4.
A Division Bench of this Court in the case of Varinder Kumar and others v. The State of Haryana and others, 2002(2) SCT 799 (P&H) (DB) : CWP No. 16317 of 2001, decided on 14022002 held as under :-  "Q) Work-charged service is not a regular service under the State and is also not continuing service.
As such the same cannot be reckoned for the purposes of granting the relief under the scheme."
"Ans) In our view, by issuing instructions from time to time the State itself has diluted the stringent meaning now sought to be and "continuing service".
Dilution of the meaning has certainly resulted in an interpretation favourable to the petitioner.
These expressions have been given a wider meaning in matters or nature of the service directly relatable to the facts of the present case.
The ad hoc service cannot be placed at a higher pedestal than the work charge service which is lateron regularised in continuation thereto.
The method of recruitment is duly codified under the Government code for making work-charge appointments.
These are not the appointments which are for few days or months.
These appointments carry on for years together as the Government work in those departments continues indefinitely.
The employees get a regular pay scale and their service conditions are duly controlled under the Government Code/Manual for regulating this aspect of the service."
5.
In view of the fact that the petitioners have continuously worked with the respondents partially on regular basis and partially on work-charged, even without a break, we are of the considered view that the respondents are not justified in declining the request of the petitioners.
The service rendered on work charged basis will form part of the continuous service for grant of the limited benefit claimed in this petition, in the facts and circumstances of the case.
The position of law as afore-noticed is well settled.
We may also notice that after the case was restored for judgment and judgment had been dictated, the respondent-Corporation had placed on record copy of the letter dated 2682002 withdrawing the instructions issued by the department on 29.5.2001.
This would lift any impediment in the grant of relief to the petitioners.
Therefore, we allow this writ petition and direct the respondents to consider the request of the petitioners for grant of additional increments after completion of 8/18 years of service by computing the service rendered by the petitioners on work-charge basis as well.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.