Swatanter Kumar, J - In this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner prays for quashing of impugned order dated 16.1.1999, Annexure P/4, vide which, services of the petitioner were terminated by the respondents.
2.
The relevant facts are that :- vide letter dated 13th May, 1996, the petitioner was appointed as a Washing Boy on temporary basis, at a salary of Rs. 750/- in the grade of Rs. 750-940 plus allowances.
The petitioner was to be on probation for a period of one year, which could be extended to two years and in case the conduct of the petitioner was not found satisfactory, his service could be terminated at any time by giving one month's notice.
The services of the petitioner were terminated on 161996.
The petitioner filed a writ petition before the High Court, being Civil Writ Petition No. 8188 of 1998.
The writ petition was disposed by a Division Bench of this Court, vide order dated 791998, directing the respondent No. 1 to deal with and decide the representations of the petitioner limited to the extent to re-consider the case of the petitioner and unless there were good reasons, which would be communicated to the petitioner within a period of two months for terminating the services, he would be reinstated.
However, he would not get the salary for the intervening period.
In furtherance to the order of the High Court, the respondents heard the petitioner and passed a detailed order dated 1691999 terminating the services of the petitioner, copy of which is annexure with the writ petition as Annexure P/4.
It is this order, which has been impugned in the present writ petition.
3.
Upon notice, the stand of the respondents, as taken in the written statement, can concisely be re-produced from the relevant portion of paragraph 7 of the written statement, which reads as under :-  "The services of the petitioner were discontinued being no longer required vide order dated 1651996 with immediate effect.
Hence it is wrong and denied that the services of the petitioner were terminated on 161996 verbally, as alleged.
It is further submitted that the then General Manager, Haryana Roadways, Sirsa had appointed the petitioner for the post of washing boy on temporary basis without approval of the then Transport Commissioner, Haryana and rules and instructions issued by the Transport Commissioner from time to time that no appointment of staff should be made without the approval of the Head Office.
It was also specifically mentioned in the Instructions attached as Annexure R-1, issued by the Head Officer which were circulated to all the General Manager in Haryana that the recruitment shall be made by a Selection Committee comprising of the local General Manager, a representative of the Head Office and a General Manager, of the distant depot.
So the General Manager, Haryana Roadways, Sirsa appointed the petitioner as Washing Boy without adhering to the Instructions cited above and when this fact was brought to the notice of the then Transport Commissioner, the then General Manager, Sirsa was asked telephonically to dispense with the services of the employee as he had been recruited in contravention of the instruction of the Head Office.
So in compliance of the telephonic orders, the then General Manager, Haryana Roadways, Sirsa dispensed with the services of the petitioner being no longer required.
In this regard, the explanation of the then General Manager, Haryana Roadways, Sirsa was also called by the then Transport Commissioner vide letter No. 6421 dated 17.5.1996 Annexure R-2 in which it was proposed to initiate action against him to recover the wages paid to the petitioner.
The explanation of the then General Manager Haryana Roadways Sirsa was considered and found unsatisfactory by the then Transport Commissioner.
It is further informed that the petitioner had worked only for two days ie 14.5.1996 to 1551996 and not upto 3151996.
So in these circumstances as mentioned above that the General Manager Haryana Roadways Sirsa did not follow the proper procedure for the recruitment of the petitioner and had flouted the instruction of the Head Office on the subject as he neither got the permission from the head Office to make this recruitment nor the recruitment was made on the recommendation of the Committee consisting of the local General Manager, a representative of the Head Office and a General Manager of the distant Depot.
So in these circumstances the services of the petitioner were dispensed with as he was not appointed as per the procedure laid down by the Head Officer."
4.
As is evident from the above pleadings of the parties, services of the petitioner were terminated, firstly for the reason that the petitioner was recruited and appointed in contravention to the instructions issued by the Head Office.
The respondents had even called for explanation of the General Manager, Haryana Roadways, Sirsa and directed to initiate appropriate action even for recovery of the amount of wages paid to Shri Naresh Kumar.
The General Manager had exceeded his authority and made the appointment of the petitioner in violation of the specific instructions and in an arbitrary manner.
In terms of the letter of appointment, the services of the petitioner could be dispensed with as he was admittedly employed subject to the condition of the letter of appointment dated 1351996, which he accepted without any protest.
The services of the petitioner were found to be not satisfactory and being in violation of the specific instructions issued by the Transport Commissioner, were terminated just after few days of his appointment on 1st June, 1996.
Thereafter, the petitioner has been litigating and was not in the employment of the respondents.
The respondents have placed on record the instructions dated 9111994, as Annexure R/1 to their written statement wherein, it was stated that delay wages or ad hoc or even regular employee could be appointed by the General Manager, only with the approval from the Head Office.
It is not disputed before us that the approval of the Head Office was not taken before or even after appointing the petitioner to the post of Washing Boy.
These instructions were in force prior to the appointment of the petitioner.
5.
Furthermore, we must notice that even the Selection Committee, as per the service rules and instructions, as reflected in paragraph 7 of the written statement was also not constituted for selection and appointment to the post.
It is not even the case of the petitioner before us that he was appointed after fair competition and strictly in accordance with the service rules and instructions issued by the competent authority.
The mere fact that the name was notified by the Employment Exchange per se is not sufficient to hold that there was substantial compliance of the Service Rules and the instructions and the appointment was fair."
6.
From the above discussion, we are of the considered view that the impugned order is a detailed order and has been passed in consonance with the settled principle of natural justice, as there was violation of rules and specific instructions issued by the Transport Commissioner, in regard to employment of an employee.
We are unable to trace any element of arbitrariness or unfairness in the impugned order.
This writ petition has no merit and is dismissed, however, leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.