RL Anand, J - The petitioners are non-matric Lab Attendants working in Guru Nanak Dev Engineering College, Ludhiana and they have filed the present writ petition against the respondents under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for issuance of a writ in the nature of certorari with a prayer that the impugned order Annexure P-21 vide which their request for grant of scale of Lab Attendants (Matric) has been rejected by a non-speaking order, be quashed.
2.
The case set up by the petitioners is that since there is no distinction with regard to the matric and non-matric Lab Attendants working in other institutions in the matter of pay, etc., yet the petitioners, who are non- matric Lab Attendants, are being discriminated in the matter of pay etc. and resultantly they are entitled to draw and get the same wages as salary which is being drawn by the Lab Attendants (matric) as the matric Lab Attendants and non-matric Lab Attendants are performing the same nature of duties under the same employment and their posting is inter se transferable.
It is further the case of the petitioners that they came to the service of Guru Nanak Dev Engineering College, Ludhiana about 20 years back.
Initially they were appointed as Attendants and then they were promoted as Lab Attendants.
In para No. 3 of the writ petition the petitioners have given the dates of their joining as Lab Attendants.
The pay scales of the Lab Attendants which had been revised by the Government from time to time have not been made over to them.
Even the pay scale of non-matric Lab Attendant has not been given to them.
They are only given the pay scale of Attendant in a most arbitrary manner.
The other category of Workshop Instructors who are also non-matric and whose case was recommended to the Directorate by the College as that of the petitioners for grant of revised pay scale of Workshop Instructors (Matric) by removing the anomalies, but the petitioners have been discriminated.
The Lab Attendants who have the qualification of matric were placed earlier in the grade of Rs. 100-600.
Then this grade was revised to Rs. 400-600 w.e.f.
111978 and Rs. 950-1800 from 111996.
On the contrary, the grade of the petitioners was Rs. 75-105 from 111968.
It was revised to Rs. 325-495 from 111978 and further revised to Rs. 810-1440 from 111986.
The college wrote to the Director of Technical Education, Punjab that the Lab Attendants is another category like Workshop Instructors who have not been given the revised scales.
It was mentioned that the Lab Attendants (non- matric) of the Punjab Engineering College, Chandigarh have been granted the revised pay scale of Rs. 100-160 from 121968 irrespective of the qualifications.
The college authorities also wrote one more letter dated 2691982 to the Director and it was requested that both the categories of employees i.e. non-matric and matric Lab Attendants are feeling hardship and the qualification bar should be removed.
Various reminders were issued in order to make out a case of the petitioners by the college authorities that a great injustice is being done to the Lab Attendants (non-matric), but to no effect in spite of the fact that the Principal of the institute had no objection to the grant of pay scale which was being given to the Lab Attendants having matric qualification.
All the requests of the petitioners and that of the authorities of the institute fell flat.
The petitioners filed a civil writ petition which was disposed of by giving direction to the respondents to the decide the representation of the petitioners.
Finally, vide order dated 1661995/1171995 (Annexure P-18) the representation of the petitioners was rejected.
In short, the case set up by the petitioners is that since they are performing the same nature of duties as are being performed by the Lab Attendants (matric), therefore, they should not be discriminated and they are entitled to the same pay, wages and emoluments on the principle of equal pay for equal work.
Moreover, in any other institute no such discrimination is being carved out to the disadvantage of the Lab Attendants who are not having matric qualification .
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
A joint written statement was filed by respondents No. 1 and 2 and it was pleaded that the equation of post or equation of pay must be left to the Executive government.
It must be determined by the expert body like the Pay Commission.
The Court should not try to twinkle (tinker ?)
with such equivalence unless it is shown that it was made with extraneous consideration whether two posts are equal or should carry equal pay depending upon several factors.
It does not just depend either upon the nature of work or volume of work done.
Primarily, it requires among others evaluation of duty and other responsibilities of the respective post.
There can be two pay scales in the same cadre of persons performing the same and similar work of duty.
It was further pleaded that the Lab Attendants (non-matric) have already been given the pay scale as revised by the Government from time to time.
There is no relevancy of the category of Lab Attendant with that of workshop Instructor with the reason that the nature of duty of both categories differ from each other.
The Workshop Instructors working in the technical institutions possess the technical experience/qualifications of respective trades and play an important role in giving training to the students of technical subjects, whereas the duties of non-matric Lab Attendants are limited to the duties of Class-IV category.
As such the scale approved for Class-IV category has already been given to this category.
At present the pay scale of this category of Lab Attendants (non- matric) is Rs. 750-1350/- with initial start of Rs. 770/-.
The pay scale sanctioned by the Government in respect of the Department of Technical Education & Industrial Training, Punjab has already been given to the Lab Attendants (non-matric).
The Punjab Engineering College, Chandigarh has nothing to do with the establishment of Guru Nanak Dev Engineering College, Ludhiana as both the institutions have their own set up and are governed by different governments.
It was also pleaded that the Lab Attendants (non- matric) having experience of 18-20 years of service have no match with the Lab Attendants (matric) on the basis of their different cadre and qualification.
Non-matric Lab attendants were given the pay scale of Rs. 950-1800/- w.e.f.
31.7.1987 after passing the trade test to judge their competency in their respective trade/area of work in relaxation of their described qualification and not by removing the bar of qualification directly.
The representation made by the petitioners was duly considered and the matter was referred for the advice of the Finance Department which conveyed the following opinion to the Directorate :-  "It is not possible to equate the Non-Matric with the Matriculation in the matter of grant of similar grade/scale to Laboratory Attendants, keeping in view different qualifications.
Department is accordingly advised to reject the demand of the petitioners by issuing speaking orders as per directions of the Hon'ble High Court."
Resultantly, the Directorate rejected the demand of the petitioners by passing a speaking order dated 1661995 by touching all the points mentioned in the representation.
The petitioners have concealed a very material fact.
Lab Attendants (non-matric) who have passed the trade test which was conducted by the Institute to judge their competency in their respective trade/area of work have already been treated a par with the Lab Attendants (matric) by relaxing the educational qualification.
In short, the case of the answering respondents is that there is no parity with regard to non-matric and matric Lab Attendants.
4.
A short reply was also filed on behalf of respondent No. 3 and it was submitted that Shiromani Gurdwara Prabandhak Committee is not running the institution.
Rather, it is being run by Nanak Sahib Education Trust and the Trust could not be sued through its Additional Secretary.
5.
A replication was filed by the petitioners to the written statement of contesting respondents No. 1 and 2 in which the averments of the writ petition were reiterated by denying those of the written statement.
6.
From the pleadings of the parties the only point which survives for determination is whether the petitioners can claim pay parity with that of Lab Attendants who have matric qualification.
To claim equal pay for equal work it is necessary for the petitioners to establish that their nature of duties is the same.
The qualifications of their counter-pats are the same for the post and their postings are inter-changeable.
While fixing the scales of a particular category of employees, it is the expert body which takes into consideration the qualifications, nature of job and nature of duties which are supposed to be performed.
It is the admitted case of the petitioners that they are non-matric.
A skilled job-holder is supposed to have knowledge with regard to the working of the instruments which are used by the students of the institution.
The management has already come to the rescue of non-matric Lab Attendants and those were allowed to get the grade of Lab Attendants (matric) who passed the departmental test regarding suitability in handling the instruments.
Mere long service in a category of employee does not give a vested right to the employees claiming pay parity.
Onus is upon such servants to show that their case is squarely covered under the parameters as laid down in the various judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme Court as well as of the High Courts.
I have already stated above that the petitioners are possessing different qualifications from that of Lab Attendants (matric).
Their working knowledge is also different.
Hence, the petitioners are not entitled to the relief on the principle of equal pay for equal work.
The writ petition is totally devoid of any merit and is hereby dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.