Amar Dutt, J - Dr CL Marwaha has filed the present petition to challenge the selection and appointment of respondent No. 3-Dr. RS Sahota, Professor, Department of Livestock Production and Management, Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana.
2.
According to the petitioner, through advertisement No. 3/98, the Punjab Agricultural university, Ludhiana (hereinafter referred to as "the University") had invited applications for 64 posts.
The post of Professor of Livestock Production and Management was shown at Sr. No. 10 in the advertisement, which appeared in "The Tribune" on 20th of September, 1998.
The qualifications and experience required for the various posts were shown in the circular issued by the Registrar of the University and from a perusal thereof it is clear that the qualifications prescribed for the post of Professor, Livestock Production and Management were as under :-  "10.
Professor of Livestock Production and Management :- Essential (i) B.V.Sc.
& A.H./B.V.Sc.
ii) Ph.D in Livestock Production & Management/Animal Husbandry and Dairying/Animal Breeding/Animal Nutrition/Animal Production Physiology with good academic record.
iii) Twelve years experience in teaching/research/extension education in Livestock Production & Management/Husbandry & Dairying/Animal Breeding/Nutrition/Animal Production Physiology out of which at least three years should be as Associate Professor or equivalent.
(iv) substantial contribution to Teaching/research and scholarship as evidenced by the teaching innovation/quality of papers published in professional journals of repute, adoption of results of research/extension education.
(v) Matric level certificate of Punjabi language.
(If not, the candidate is required to pass the same within one year of appointment).
Job Requirements (i) Assigned teaching work, (ii) to develop modern teaching facilities and provide leadership in the field of Livestock Production & Management.
(iii) Research/extension education work in Livestock Production & Management.
(iv) To take initiative in bringing research projects for strengthening the research, teaching & extension education programmes.
(v) Any other duties assigned.
(All see note 1 & 2 on page 16).
xxx xxx xxx xxx Note 1 (For posts at Sr. No. 1 to 27) The term good academic record with PhD degree shall imply that the candidate possesses at least second class at Master's degree level.
Note 2 (For posts at Sr. No. 1 to 27) The period spent for obtaining Ph.
D. degree or maximum of three years whichever is less, is taken into account while counting the experience requirements for Professor and Associate Professor level posts in the pay scale of Rs. 4500-7300 and Rs. 3700-5700 respectively."
3.
The detailed advertisement was forwarded by the University to various departments indicated in Annexure P-1 as well as to the Indian Embassy in France and Washington and the Indian High Commission in Britain and Canada.
The applications were to be submitted by the 23rd of October, 1998, after which date, according to the petitioner, the University had issued an internal circular on 15.3.1999, according to which, it was decided to add the following foot note to the qualifications prescribed for the post of Professor of Livestock Production and Management :-  "The requirement of B.V.Sc.
& A.H./B.V.Sc.
at least with second division will be relatable in the case of teachers of the erstwhile Departments of Animal Science and Animal Nutrition of the PAU possessing BSc/BSc.
Agri.
at least with second division."
In this circular, copy annexed as Annexure P-2, the last date for submission of the application forms was extended upto 31st of March, 1999.
On the basis of the relaxation of the qualifications initially prescribed in annexure P-1, respondent No. 3 had applied for the post and was selected.
The grouse evinced by Dr. Marwaha in the petition is that as notice of relaxation of the qualifications and the extension of the date by which applications were to be submitted was not given to any one outside the University, he and many others like him were deprived of the opportunity of applying for the post and competing for selection.
He also submits that respondent No. 3 did not have the requisite three years experience as Associate Professor on 15.3.1999 and, therefore, could not have been selected for the post in the interview held on 21.6.1999.
He also assails the approval granted to the appointment of Dr. RS Sahota as Professor, Livestock Production and Management by the Board of Management on 25.6.1999 and states that a mala fide intention to favour Dr. RS Sahota should be inferred from the haste with which the University had cleared his appointment.
4.
The respondents relied upon the powers of the Academic Council of the University to fix and change essential qualifications prescribed for any post which has to be filled in the University.
They submit that the change of the qualifications indicated for the post of Professor, Livestock Production and Management having been carried out by the Academic Council, no complaint can be entertained at the behest of any of the candidate about the same.
5.
We have heard Shri PS Patwalia, on behalf of the petitioner and Shri HNS Gill on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2.
6-7.
On behalf of the petitioner, it is submitted that the appointment of Dr. RS Sahota, respondent No. 2, cannot be sustained as the essential qualifications prescribed for the post of Professor, Livestock Production and Management, in advertisement No. 3/98 have been changed through an internal circular issued by the University amongst its employees which change has prevented the petitioner and other persons like him, who would be eligible for consideration in view of the changed qualifications, from applying for the post.
It was also submitted that no relaxation of the qualifications or the last date for submission of the applications was permissible nor could the teaching experience be reduced without giving adequate publicity so as to attract the eligible talent.
8.
We have carefully considered the arguments and perused the records.
9.
The factual averments made by the petitioner are not disputed inasmuch as after the advertisement dated 20th September, 1998, in which the requisite qualifications for the post of Professor, Livestock Production and Management, were prescribed, as mentioned earlier, the respondent University on 1531999, had issued a foot-note to the qualifications so prescribed.
10.
Consequent upon the aforesaid foot-note, which was added and circulated in the University itself, respondent No. 3 and others like him had applied and because of the change in qualifications he had been selected.
Apart from the fact that this relaxation would not be permissible without having been approved by the Academic Council, the last date for submission of the applications was changed to 31.3.1999 with a view to help respondent No. 3 for completing the experience of three years as an Associate Professor, which he did not possess on 23101998.
Such a change in the qualifications prescribed in the initial advertisement cannot but be proned upon and deserves to be set aside as per judicial precedents available in BR Garg & Others v. Maharishi Dayanand University, Rohtak & others, 1987(1) S.L.R.
519, wherein an extract from Kuldip Singh Gill v. State of Punjab and others, 1972 S.L.R.
706, to the following effect was relied upon :-  "No relaxation can be granted when an advertisement has been issued inviting applications and persons possessing the qualifications advertised are available and submit their applications.
If a relaxation has to be allowed, the advertisement should be issued, again so that all eligible persons in view of the relaxation to be allowed, should be able to apply for the job.
Once the qualifications have appeared in the advertisement inviting applications, those qualifications cannot be changed and the selection has to be made out of the candidates possessing those qualifications."
11.
While dealing with a similar case, the Apex Court in State of Haryana and others v. Anurag Srivastava & Others, JT 1998(9) SC 190, observed as follows :-  "Learned counsel for the 2nd respondent has relied upon two decisions of this Court in Ashok Kumar Sharma v. Chander Shekhari, [JT 1997(4) SC 99] and Rekha Chaturvedi v. University of Rajasthan, 1993(2) SCT 279 (SC) : [JT 1993(1) SC 220].
Both these judgments hold that the qualifications which have to be considered are those possessed as on the last date of filing applications.
The High Court has, therefore, rightly held that the 2nd respondent did not possess the requisite qualifications at the material time and was not entitled to be selected under the advertisement of 7.12.1980.
The appeal is, therefore, dismissed."
12.
To the same effect are the observations contained in Miss Shainda Hasan v. State of Uttar Pradesh & others, 1991(3) S.L.R.
10.
13.
In view of this, while there is no dispute with the proposition that an employer has the absolute right to prescribe the requisite qualifications for a post to be filled by him, yet having once prescribed those qualifications, if any change is to be made therein, it is but appropriate to expect from him to do so in a manner in which other persons similarly placed are not prejudiced by the lack of requisite publicity to the change so incorporated.
In the present case, since it is not disputed that the qualifications for the post of Professor, Livestock Production and Management were changed through circular dated 15.3.1999, which was restricted to internal circulation within the University, the possibility of this internal circulation having eliminated certain prospective applicants for the post advertised, cannot be ruled out.
The notification as well as the selection which followed the same can, therefore, not be sustained.
14.
For the reasons recorded above, the writ petition is allowed, the order appointing respondent No. 3 is set aside and the respondent University is directed to proceed with the recruitment to the post of Professor, Livestock production and Management, after giving due publicity to the qualifications and other desirable particulars required by the University.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.