RL Anand, J - Shri Inder Singh petitioner has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India seeking directions of this Court for the quashment of order dated 20101995 vide which his representation for grant of pensionary benefits has been rejected.
The petitioner has further made a prayer that directions be given to the respondents to make the petitioner eligible for grant of pensionary benefits and to release the same as per the policy with effect from the date of his retirement.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that on 15.12.1959 he joined service in erstwhile Punjab State Electricity Board before the bifurcation of the State of Punjab and his services were allocated to Haryana State Electricity Board on the reorganisation of the State.
He was promoted as Head Mistri on 25111981 and then Foreman Grade-III on 1111993.
He retired from the service on 31121993 after attaining the age of 58 years.
3.
In the month of March, 1982 he was provided an opportunity to switch over to the General Provident Fund Scheme from Employee's Provident Fund Scheme and he started contributing towards General Provident Fund Scheme from March, 1982.
But in the month of November, 1984 he was stopped from contributing towards General Provident Fund Scheme which was started in the month of march, 1982.
In the month of December, 1988 several other employees were allowed to switch over to General Provident Fund Scheme.
The petitioner and some other employees made representation to the Board for switching over to General Provident Fund Scheme.
In August, 1993, respondent No. 1 issued another circular vide which the Board adopted the State Govt. notification for counting the work charged service towards pensionary benefits.
The petitioner submitted his option in view of the second policy of the Board.
The option of the petitioner was accepted and he was asked to deposit the whole amount contributed by the Board.
The petitioner deposited a sum of Rs. 74,436/-, but he has not been granted the benefit of the pensionary scheme, as a result of which he filed a representation and a writ petition in the High Court directing the Board to consider his representation which was rejected on 20101995.
4.
The case of the petitioner thus is two-fold.
Firstly, he was entitled to the General Provident Fund Scheme in pursuance of the scheme of 1982; and secondly, he exercised the option in the revised scheme of August, 1993, but he was not given the benefit of this scheme.
Therefore, the present writ petition.
5.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents, who filed the reply and denied the allegations.
According to the respondents, the petitioner was appointed on regular basis in the Board as Hammerman on 15.12.1959 and he retired from the service on 31121993.
Till his date of superannuation he continued to be a member of the Employee Provident Fund Scheme and, therefore, he was not entitled to switch over to the General Provident Fund Scheme after his retirement.
Moreover, option once exercised could not be revoked or withdrawn.
The petitioner had given his option in favour of Employees Provident Fund Scheme from the very beginning and hence the Board was contributing its share in the Employees Provident Fund Scheme.
At no point of time prior to 711986 the petitioner opted from Employees Provident Scheme to General Provident Fund Scheme and pensionary benefits.
Hence, he is not entitled to the benefits of General Provident Fund Scheme of March, 1982.
The petitioner is also not entitled to the pensionary benefits being a member of Employees Provident Fund Scheme till his retirement i.e. 31121993.
The cut off date was 711986.
The petitioner did not opt for General Provident Fund Scheme prior to 711986.
With regard to the second scheme, it is the stand of the respondents that a false option dated 21121995 was given by the petitioner stating that he is a work charged employee, but he was never a work changed employee.
On the other hand, he was appointed on regular basis from the very beginning i.e. 15.12.1959.
Therefore, the petitioner gave an impression to the Board that he being work-charged employee was covered under the second scheme of August, 1993.
He fraudulently deposited a sum of Rs. 74,436/- for switching over to the new scheme and when this fraud was detected the amount was not accepted.
Thus the stand of the respondents is that the petitioner is not entitled to any of the benefits of the General Provident Fund Scheme because in order to avail the benefits of the first Scheme the cut off date was 711986.
The petitioner did not exercise his option and with regard to the second Scheme, which was for the benefit of the work charged employee, the petitioner did not fall in that category, therefore, he was not entitled to the benefits of his Scheme altogether.
6.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance have gone through the record of this case.
7.
After going through the record of this case I am of the opinion that this writ petition must fail.
With regard to the earlier Scheme the case of the petitioner was examined and rejected and to that extent the petitioner was also informed in the year 1994 itself.
His case was declined on the policy decision that the employees who had already become members of the Employees Provident Scheme by way of exercising their option and continued to pay the contribution for years together cannot, at a later stage, become members of the General Provident Fund with pensionary benefits.
Option once exercised could not be withdrawn at a later stage, otherwise, there would be no finality of action and as such principle of estoppel will apply.
The petitioner applied for Employees Provident Fund Scheme and he had been contributing for years together which was matched by the Board.
Therefore, the petitioner could not take the benefits of this Scheme.
Moreover, before the cut off date the petitioner never opted to switch over to the General Provident Fund Scheme.
8.
With regard to the subsequent Scheme, the petitioner was not eligible.
He was working on regular basis and was the member of the Employee's Provident Fund Scheme and had been enjoying the benefits of that Scheme.
He made a false representation giving false option that he is a work charged employee.
It was factually wrong and incorrect.
When this fact came into the notice of the Board it rightly rejected the representation.
Such a point came up for consideration before the High Court in Roshan Lal v. Haryana State Electricity Board & another, 1996(1) SLR 454 : 1996(2) SCT 819 (P&H)(DB) and the Hon'ble Division Bench was pleased to hold that when an employee remained a member of the Employee's Provident Scheme for a continuous period of 27 years till the date of his retirement without any protest of any kind, it is sufficient to justify an inference that his claim to the effect that he had opted for pension scheme is unfounded.
The ratio of this judgment is fully applicable to the facts in hand.
There is no cogent proof on the record that the petitioner opted for the General Provident Fund Scheme.
Rather, he had been contributing towards Employee's Provident Fund Scheme till the date of his retirement.
He was not eligible for the second Scheme.
Therefore, he is not entitled to any relief whatsoever.
9.
Resultantly, the writ petition is hereby dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.