Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was working as a Project Officer with the Haryana Dairy Development Cooperative Ltd vide order dated March 22, 1999 he was ordered to be retired.
Aggrieved by the order, the petitioner submitted an appeal to the Board of Directors.
After consideration of the matter, the appeal was dismissed.
The order was conveyed to the petitioner vide letter dated September 17, 1999.
The petitioner prays that the order of retirement passed on March 22, 1999 and the order dated September 17, 1999 passed on appeal, copies of which have been produced as Annexures P7 and P9 with the writ petition, be quashed.
The petitioner further prays that the letters by which adverse reports were conveyed to him viz. Annexures P3 and P5 with the writ petition be also quashed.
The petitioner alleges that there was no material to support the adverse remarks recorded against him.
2.
The respondents contested the petitioner's claim.
A detailed written statement has been filed.
It has been pointed out that during the period from 1978-79 to 1996-97 the petitioner had earned eleven `Good' reports.
On four occasions he was assessed as `Average'.
In the year 1994-95 his performance was found to be `Below Average'.
The reputation for integrity was not found to be good.
Details regarding the petitioner's performance of duties have also been given.
On the basis, it is claimed that the order of retirement is legal and valid.
3.
Mr. Yadav, learned counsel for the petitioner, contends that there was no basis for the adverse remarks.
Thus, the order of retirement based on those remarks cannot be sustained.
The claim had been controverted by the counsel for the respondents.
4.
A perusal of the impugned order shows that the petitioner's claim for extension in service beyond 50 years was considered.
It was noticed that in the year 1991-92 his performance was `Average'.
For the year 1994-95 he was assessed to be `Below Average'.
There was an adverse report regarding his integrity.
Even in the report for the year 1997-98 it was mentioned that his honesty "cannot be taken for granted".
Still further, it was also noticed that assessment reports for the years 1988-89 to 1990-91 could not be recorded as he had remained under suspension.
Various other facts reflecting adversely on the petitioner's record of service have also been noticed.
On a consideration of the matter the authority had come to the conclusion that it would be appropriate to retire the petitioner.
5.
The material taken into consideration by the authority was relevant to the issue of the petitioner's suitability for continuance in service.
There was an objective consideration of the material on record.
6.
Mr. Yadav submits that there was no basis for the adverse reports.
The contention is wholly misconceived.
The petitioner had admittedly submitted representation against the adverse remarks.
This was duly considered by the competing authority.
It was dismissed.
This Court in proceedings under Article 226 of the Constitution does not hear an appeal against the order passed by the competent authority.
In the very nature of things and unless a clear case is made out, the High Court cannot inquire into the validity of the remarks recorded by the competent authority.
This is all the more so in the case like the present one where even a suggestion of any extraneous consideration has not been made.
Thus, it cannot be said that the adverse reports or the orders passed on the representation of the petitioner are not tenable in law.
In fact, it is the petitioner's own case that he had raised all the issues in his representation against the order of retirement.
This matter was considered in entirety by the Board of Directors and the petitioner's claim was rejected.
7.
No other point has been raised.
In view of the above, I find no merit in this petition.
It is, consequently, dismissed.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.