Amar Bir Singh Gill, J - The petitioner has assailed the order dated 651998 (Annexure P8) of punishment providing stoppage of annual increment with cumulative effect which was confirmed by the revisional order dated 25121998 (Annexure P12).
2.
The case of the petitioner is that in the year 1997 he was posted in Panchkula when on the night of 2791997 on mere suspicion by the Station House Officer of Police Station, Panchkula, he was produced before the Medical Officer and got examined, and on his report departmental enquiry was initiated against him on the allegation that the petitioner had consumed liquor during duty hours on that night inspite of being a member of disciplinary force and prohibition in the State of Haryana.
the inquiry was conducted by the Welfare Inspector, Panchkula.
He served charge sheet and statement of allegations on the petitioner on 10101997, copy of which Annexure P2.
After completion of the investigation the submitted his report on the basis of which the Punishing authority issued him show case notice and passed the impugned order Annexure P8.
However, the grievance of the petitioner is that the inquiry was not conducted fairly and he was not given due opportunity to cross examine the witnesses besides there was no evidence to the effect that he had even taken liquor and, even the medical report as well as the statement of the doctor did not conclusively prove that he had taken liquor.
So also, it was not proved that he was on duty at the relevant time.
He further claimed that the appellate authority did not afford him personal hearing though he requested for the same in the memorandum of his appeal and that the impugned orders are non-speaking orders.
The petitioner thus claims quashing of the orders being vitiated in view of the infirmities in the conduct of inquiry against him.
3.
The respondent authorities had contested the claim of the petitioner.
In the written statement, the respondents have claimed that the petitioner was found drunked at duty hours besides there was prohibition in the State and that the petitioner was afforded every reasonable opportunity who failed to produce any evidence in his defence and that there was no infirmity in the impugned orders.
Heard learned counsel for the parties.
4.
The scope of judicial review of the orders passed by the authorities in the disciplinary proceedings no doubt, is to the limited extent to appreciate if the delinquent official has been provided adequate opportunity as envisaged in the rules besides the Rule of Natural Justice, for preparing his defence as well as defending himself i.e. to say that he was a afforded opportunity to cross-examine the witnesses produced against him and to produce his witnesses, if he chooses to do so, in his defence.
The court cannot sit on appeal as to the sufficiency of evidence collected during the inquiry against the delinquent official.
However, if the allegations are that the report of the inquiry officer is based on no evidence, the court examine the plea.
In the instant case primarily, it is to be seen whether the petitioner was on duty at the relevant time when he was found under the influence of liquor.
The allegation against the petitioner is that on the fateful night, the incharge of the patrolling party SI Surinder Pal Singh was present at the Check post, Mata Mansa Devi Road, when the petitioner happened to come there and was taken to the Dispensary for medical examination by SI Surinder Pal Singh.
The inquiry report as well as the impugned order (Annexure P8) does not refer to any evidence that the petitioner was on duty at the relevant time.
The list of witnesses Annexure P4 appended with the charge sheet (Annexure P2) refers to four witnesses, who were examined by the inquiry officer and their statements are reproduced in the inquiry report (Annexure P5).
No witness was produced to prove the duty roster of the petitioner to say that at the relevant time the petitioner was in fact on duty.
5.
In identical case Rattan Lal Ex-Constable v. The State of Haryana and others, 1983(2) S.L.R.
159 this court observed as under :-  "The learned Additional Advocate General appearing for the respondent- authorities on the plea that a police officer is supposed to be on 24 hours' duty and, thus, even if the petitioner was not performing the duty of a Sentry at the Malkhana he is to be presumed to be on the duty.
I am afraid, I cannot possibly accept this submission of the learned Additional Advocate-General.
If that be so, then all members of the Police Force, high or low, have to be taken on duty during the course of their entire service right from the day of their enrolment and if consumption of alcohol has again to be taken as a misconduct then probably most of them can any time be held guilty of the same.
To everybody's knowledge, the factual position is entirely different.
Otherwise also I am of the considered view that mere consumption of alcohol even if it has to be taken as an established fact in the case in hand does not amount to any misconduct known to the service Rules.
Merely because an employee is found under the influence of liquor without anything more, does not, to my mind, render the employee to any such disciplinary action.
The learned Additional Advocate-General is not in a position to bring to my notice any precedent or principle on the basis of which it can be said that mere consumption of liquor by an employee, particularly when he is not on duty, amounts to misconduct of misbehaviour.
It rather looks somewhat intriguing that the State and its functionaries who treat excise revenue as one of its major sources of income should hold that mere consumption of alcohol by its employees is some sort of misconduct."
The observation above aptly covers the case of the present petitioner.
6.
The contention further of the petitioner is that he was not even under the influence of liquor and had not taken liquor is also substantiated from the record of the respondents.
The doctor who examined the petitioner when he was taken for medical examination gave his report that the person has consumed mild alcohol and was not under the influence of the same.
He further reported that the person is smelling of alcohol.
Conjectivitus is congested.
Gait and speech are normal.
7.
Though the petitioner was medically examined on 2791997 at 2.10 A.M., the petitioner had taken a stand that he had not taken the liquor on the fateful night but had taken medicine because he was suffering from certain ailment and the medicines prescribed by the doctor contained a part of it alcohol.
Even the doctor in his cross examination before the inquiry officer had admitted that certain medicines contain alcohol partly.
The authorities did not consider the certificate produced by the petitioner in respect of prescription of medicines by the doctor, before the inquiry officer merely on the ground that the medical prescriptions were not immediately close to the date of incident.
The plea of the petitioner who claims to be suffering from heart disease and blood pressure besides having been operated for Gal Bladder, was advised certain medicines with alcoholic formulation, cannot be ignored simply because the prescriptions pertain to some earlier date.
The petitioner in the circumstances was able to explain away the allegations against him that he was found smelling of liquor when he was medically examined.
It is otherwise not disputed that the petitioner was suffering from any such disease or that he had not been operated upon and his Gal Bladder was removed.
According to him he was advised not to take liquor as precautionary measure in view of his health condition.
It is not disputed by the respondent's counsel that so many medicines in liquid form contained alcohol as one of the ingredients like sedatives.
Be that as it may be very basis of the charge that the petitioner while on duty was under the influence of liquor, is not made out in this case from the report of the Inquiry Officer.
The Punjab Police Rules as applicable to the State of Haryana, regarding Discipline and Conduct, Chapter XIV, also do not contain any such provision.
8.
The totality of the circumstances of the case thus indicate that there was hardly any evidence to proceed departmentally against him and thus the order of punishment was passed without any evidence to show that the petitioner was on duty and was under the influence of liquor.
In the circumstances this petition is allowed.
The impugned orders dated 651998 and 1791998 (Annexure P8 and P10), are quashed.
Petition allowed.