Swatanter Kumar, J - The petitioner in this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, prays for issuance of an appropriate writ, order or direction to the respondents particularly the Principal, Arts and Crafts Institution, Hall Gate, Amritsar, to grant admission to the petitioner in the said College.
2.
The facts giving rise to the petition are that the petitioner who is a domicile of Himachal Pradesh, passed his matriculation from Government High School, Cholthara, District Mandi, and in response to the advertisement issued by the respondents for allocation of 80 seats each in Government Arts and Crafts Colleges in three different institutions of Nabha, Amritsar and Hoshiarpur.
In these institutions training is given to the teachers in Arts and Crafts.
There are 80 seats in Government Arts and Crafts Institute, Amritsar.
As per the terms and conditions of the brochure out of these 80 seats, the reserved seats for different categories like Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes, handicaps etc., 40 seats are reserved for girls ad 40 for boys.
Out of the 40 seats reserved for boys, 50% of which were reserved and out of the remaining, 50% seats were kept for general category i.e. only 40 seats were kept for general category.
Out of this 90% seats are kept and reserved for the students who are residents of Punjab and 10% seats are kept for general category and are reserved for other States than Punjab.
The seats are to be filled in on merit from the general category.
The procedure for filling up the seats, as translated from the brochure and re-produced in the writ petition reads as under :-  Procedure for selection  Merits shall be prepared purely on the marks obtained in the Matric.
Total Seats The seats are provided to the following institutions are as under :- i) Government Arts and Crafts Institution, Nabha - 80 (Out of which 40 seats are for girls and 40 seats are for boys) ii) Government Arts and Crafts Institution, Amritsar -do- iii) Government Arts and Crafts Institution, Hoshiarpur -do- RESERVE SEATS - 50% Necessary Note for reservation "The seats which were kept reserved for the candidates of different categories that is only meant for the resident of the State of Punjab.
The remaining seats of the general category out of 90% thereof shall be kept reserved for the residents of Punjab only and 10% from the general category shall be for the other States which shall be taken on the basis of the merit only from General category.
The seats which could not be filled the same shall be filled up from the general category on the basis of the merit from the candidates of the residents of state of Punjab only."
3.
Respondents No. 4 and 5 are admittedly higher in merit than the petitioner and have been given seats in Punjab domicile category.
The petitioner ranked 66 in merit.
On the interpretation of the above clause, the submission of the petitioner is that 10% of the seats are reserved for students of other States than Punjab and as such the petitioner should have been granted admission in preference of respondents No. 4 and 5 who have applied and are actually belonging to Punjab domicile category.
4.
Upon notice, the respondents filed reply and it was stated that upto 10% seats are reserved for the candidates from other States and can be filled from general category provided such candidate fall in merit in the general category merit list.
5 candidates from other States had got higher marks than the petitioner.
However, it was not disputed that so far nobody from other States has been given admission in the course.
Reliance was placed upon the letter dated 2971998 from the Director, Technical Education and Industrial Training, Punjab, to the head of the Institutions on the above lines, copy whereof is placed on record as Annexure R/2.
5.
The facts in the above case are hardly in dispute.
The pertinent question that falls for consideration of the Court relates primarily to the interpretation of the above "Necessary Note for Reservation" in regard to the reserved seats.
The intention behind the clause and the necessary/important note appears to be avoiding 100% State reservation.
By now it is a settled proposition of law that 100% State reservation offends the principle of equality and will be discriminatory for all purposes and intents.
In all preferential courses there are All India and State reservations.
The intention of the authorities is further apparent from the language of the note which clearly states "10% from the general category shall be for the other States which shall be taken on the basis of the merit only from general category."
6.
The reservation is obviously intended for the candidates domicile of States other than Punjab.
The inevitable result of the expression used by the rule making authority is intended to necessarily exclude the grant of 10% of 50% of the general seats to the candidates of Punjab domicile.
Once the reservation is meant for domiciles of other States, the same cannot be filled up by the Punjab domicile unless and until the States seats remain unfilled and are surrendered to the Punjab domicile quota in accordance with the mandate of the note.
In the present petition, nearly 7 students are eligible as per the case of the respondents for the 2 seats which have fallen to the reserved quota of other States.
The general merit list obviously have two different categories in its fold.
One, the Punjab domicile category and second of all other States.
The seats should be filled up in accordance with the merit of each category.
This entire mater can be explained by the All India and States quotas in the MBBS/BDS courses.
A candidate will be entitled to a seat on merit but in its own category.
All India quota is meant for the States of the candidates as well as other States.
The present note has been intentionally worded differently by the competent authority.
7.
From the language of the Important Note it is clear that the authorities concerned have not termed the quota as "All India quota" which would, by necessary implication, include the State of Punjab.
It has clearly reserved the seats (10%) for the candidates who are from other States.
The necessary consequence thereof is that the candidates have to be from other States and not the State of Punjab.
They are to furnish the domicile from other States.
The condition of eligibility ousts the Punjab domicile candidates from claiming these seats except when the seats remain unfilled by the candidates of other States and are in true surrendered to the Punjab domicile candidates.
From the merit list it is clear that seats are allotted on the basis of the marks obtained in the matriculation examination.
Two different and independent compartments have been created by this rule which, at the first instance, must be filled from the category for which the seats are reserved.
8.
For the reasons afore-stated we accept this writ petition and direct the respondents to offer two seats to the candidates belonging to other States/domiciles of other States in order of merit and preferably without disturbing respondents No. 4 and 5 who have already been admitted to the course and are pursuing the same and there is no fault attributable to these respondents.
It is a settled proposition of law that if there is a fault on the part of the authorities in awarding seats and the Court interferes as a result of such mis-interpretation or default, it will always be more appropriate to direct admission on the basis of the merit despite the fact that other candidates have not approached the Court.
Reference in this regard can be made to the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the case of Dr. (Mrs.) Santosh Kumari v. Union of India others, 1994(5) SLR 784 : 1995(1) SCT 527 (SC).
9.
In view of the our discussion above, this writ petition is allowed limited to the extent afore-noticed.
However, there shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.