RC Kathuria, J - In this petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution, the petitioner has prayed for issuance of a writ of certiorari quashing the order dated March 19, 2001 (Annexure `P-7') whereby she has been reverted from the post of Child Development Project Officer to that of Assistant Child Development Project Officer.
2.
The petitioner joined the Punjab Social Security and Welfare Department as Anganwadi Worker.
She was promoted as Supervisor on November 23, 1990 and thereafter as Assistant Child Development Project Officer on March 20, 1996.
In due course of time, she was promoted as Child Development Project Officer on August 07, 1996.
3.
In the year 1997, a Selection Committee was constituted for the purposes of selecting Anganwadi Workers.
Besides the petitioner, the Selection Committee consisted of Programme Officer as its Chairman, Deputy Director of the Social Security Department, Senior medical Officer and other members.
Smt. Simranjit Kaur, Smt. Vir Kaur, Smt. Rajwinder Kaur and Smt. Amarjit Kaur made complaints, supported by their affidavits, stating therein that the petitioner had accepted Rs. 12,000/- from each of them and had assured to get them recruited as Anganwadi Workers.
Smt. Paramjit Kaur also made such a complaint that she had paid Rs. 14,000/- to the petitioner on an assurance given to her that she would be got recruited as an Anganwadi Worker.
4.
Keeping in view the seriousness of the allegations made, the petitioner was placed under suspension.
The Deputy Commissioner, Amritsar, directed Sub Divisional Magistrate, Tarn Taran to look into the allegations made against the petitioner by Smt. Simaranjit Kaur & others.
The Sub Divisional Magistrate, Tarn Taran, as per his letter dated February 12, 1999 (Annexure P-3) informed the Deputy Commissioner, Amritsar, that recruitment had been made with the consent of all the members of the Selection Committee including its Chairman and that the complainant being dissatisfied with the procedure adopted by the Selection Committee had made the complaint.
The Punishing Authority did not agree with the report of the Sub Divisional Magistrate, Tarn Taran and initiated departmental enquiry against the petitioner.
Mr. MM Oberoi, IAS (Retd.)
was appointed as an Enquiry Officer to enquire into the allegations made by Smt. Simranjit Kaur, Smt. Vir Kaur, Smt. Rajwinder Kaur, Smt. Amarjit Kaur and Smt. Paramjit Kaur against the petitioner.
On the basis of the evidence adduced before the Enquiry Officer, he came to the conclusion that the petitioner had failed to perform her duties with honesty and had not maintained absolute integrity.
The enquiry report was accepted by the Punishing Authority and a show cause notice dated July 21, 2000 (Annexure `P- 5') proposing imposition of major punishment as prescribed in Rule 5(v) to (ix) of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 was served upon the petitioner.
She submitted a detailed representation to the Punishing Authority.
After consideration of the same, she was reverted from the post of Child Development Project Officer to that the Assistant Child Development Project Officer.
It is this action of the respondents which has been challenged by her in this writ petition.
5.
We have heard learned counsel for the petitioner and have gone through the record of the writ petition.
6.
Learned counsel for the petitioner, while assailing the order dated March 19, 2001 (Annexure `P-7'), has strenuously urged before us that the Enquiry Officer failed to take into account that a belated complaint, after about one and a half years of the selection of Anganwadi Workers by the Selection Committee, had been made by unsuccessful candidates, namely, Smt. Simranjit Kaur, Smt. Vir Kaur, Smt. Rajwinder Kaur, Smt. Amarjit Kaur and Smt. Paramjit Kaur.
It was also pointed out by him that the petitioner was only one of the members of the Selection Committee and for that reason there was no occasion for her to give assurance to the complainants regarding their appointment as Anganwadi Workers and to make a demand of bribe money from them.
He further submitted that the Enquiry Officer did not afford any opportunity to the petitioner to cross-examine Smt. Vir Kaur, one of the complainants.
7.
The Enquiry Officer, during the course of enquiry, recorded the statements of Smt. Vir Kaur, Smt. Rajwinder Kaur and Smt. Amarjit Kaur.
All the three of them testified before the Enquiry Officer that the petitioner had accepted Rs. 12,000/- from each of them and had promised them that they would be appointed as Anganwadi Workers.
Smt. Paramjit Kaur was also examined as a witnesses by the Enquiry Officer and she too stated that she had given Rs. 4,000/- to the petitioner for her appointment as Anganwadi Worker.
They had also maintained before the Enquiry Officer that after they were not given appointments, they approached the petitioner for refund of the money, but she refused to do so.
In addition, they also proved the affidavits which were furnished by them along with their complaints.
Even Kartar Singh, who was examined as a defence witness, had expressed his ignorance with regard to the complainants made by the above-mentioned complainants.
The grievance of the petitioner that no opportunity was given to her to cross-examine Smt. Vir Kaur, is belied by the report of the Enquiry Officer.
Under the circumstances, we find no infirmity whatsoever in the conclusion drawn by the Enquiry Officer on the basis of the evidence of the witnesses recorded by him.
8.
Merely because the enquiry proceedings were initiated after about one and half years of the selection of the Anganwadi Workers when complaints were made against the petitioner, would not be a ground to ignore the gravity of the allegations made and proved against her.
The other stand taken from the side of the petitioner that she was only a member of the Selection Committee and had no occasion and scope to make any demand from the complainants, deserves rejection outrightly.
It cannot be denied that being a member of the Selection Committee, the petitioner could influence the selection of Anganwadi Workers and for that reason had promised and assured the complainants that she would help them in their recruitment as such.
In consideration thereof, the complainants had paid the bribe money demanded by her.
9.
It is well-settled that while examining the findings recorded by the Enquiry Officer, the High Court does not exercise the powers of an appellate Court.
Rather, the power of the judicial review is limited to extent to find out whether during the course of enquiry the principles of natural justice had been followed and that no prejudice had been caused to the delinquent official on this account.
In this case, we find that the petitioner had been afforded full opportunity to defend herself during the course of enquiry.
The findings of the Enquiry Officer are record-based.
The Punishing Authority, after taking into account the findings of the Enquiry Officer and affording full opportunity to the petitioner to make representation against the report of the Enquiry Officer, has awarded the impugned punishment to the petitioner.
In the result, we do not find any merit in this writ petition and dismiss the same in limine.
Petition dismissed.