Swatanter Kumar, J - The petitioner appeared for final semester examination of the degree course for Bachelor of Engineering (Chemical) in May, 2001.
The petitioner appeared for the entrance examination for Master in Business and Administration (M.B.A. in short) on all India basis in June, 2001.
On 472001 the petitioner was called for counselling.
The petitioner was permitted to take the entrance test in view of Clause 7 of the prospectus.
Clause 7 provided as under:-  "7.
The candidates appearing in final degree examinations are eligible to apply and can take the written test provisionally.
They will have to fulfill the eligibility condition at the time of admission, failing which the candidates will not be considered for admission even after they have gone through all the stages of the admission process."
Thus, the petitioner was permitted to take the entrance test and was required to produce his result by the conselling agency on 472001.
The petitioner approached respondents No. 3 and 4 i.e. Maharashi Dayanand University, Rohtak on 672001 requesting that the result of the petitioner be declared so that he could take admission the M.B.A. course.
However, the result of the petitioner was not declared till 1672001 when the classes were to start.
Resultantly, the petitioner filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India praying for issuance of an appropriate writ, order or direction to the respondents No. 3 and 4 to declare the result of the petitioner and requiring other respondents to give provisional admission to the petitioner.
2.
Upon notice, respondents No. 1 and 2 filed a written statement and it is stated that the students who were not able to produce their result or detailed mark-sheets of the qualifying examination at the time of admission or even by the extended date i.e. 2072001, they could not be granted admission in th M.B.A. course.
According to these respondents a list of the students who have not submitted the result of the qualifying examination on 472001, has been placed on record as Annexure R/1 and all these students had to be denied admission for non-production of the documents afore referred.
3.
The learned counsel appearing for the Maharashi Dayanand University, Rohtak, contended that the result could not be declared on time for the reason that one paper of the final year of Chemical Engineering was out of course.
Lot of protests were received from the students.
Resultantly, all the students were directed to take the paper again as a result of which the compilation of the final result was delayed considerably.
As such no fault was attributable to the University.
4.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties at some length.
the facts are hardly in dispute in the present case.
The petitioner along with number of the other candidate could not submit their final year result or even detailed mark-sheet before the competent authority within the prescribed period i.e. 472001.
They were unable to produce the said documents even by extended date i.e. 2072001.
The result was declared on 20.8.2001.
Thereafter the petitioner could have produced the said result before the authorities.
It is clear that no fault is attributable to any of the respondents.
As per the Full Bench judgment of this Court in the case of Amardeep Singh Sahota v. State of Punjab and others, 1993(4) SCT 328(P&H)(FB) : 1993(4) SLR 673 and Rahul Prabhakar v. Punjab Technical University, Jalandhar and others, 1997(3) SCT 526 (P&H)(FB) : 1997(3) P.L.R.
13 terms and conditions of the brochure are binding.
5.
The students were required to produce the result on 472001 as they were permitted to take the entrance test provisionally and it was stipulated as per Clause 7 of the brochure referred supra that they have to satisfy the eligibility condition at the time of admission i.e. 472001.
Panjab University had extended the date of admission in the interests of the students to 2172001 as large number of students were not able to produce the result by 2172001, the last date by which the admission could be granted with payment of late fee, that too, with the order of the competent authority, had elapsed and the other students who had submitted the result and satisfied the eligibility condition were granted admission.
Maharashi Dayanand University, Rohtak does not appear to be at fault as one of the papers of the Bachelor of Engineering (Chemical) was cancelled being out of the course and all students were required to take the examination afresh.
This caused unavoidable delay in declaration of result of these students.
6.
The learned counsel for the petitioner while relying upon the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of M Sreedevi v University of Medical Sciences, AP and others, 2001(1) SCT 100 (SC) : 2000(4) R.S.J.
29 contended that the petitioner is meritorious and, therefore, should be granted a seat, particularly when the persons of lower merit have been granted admission.
We may notice that in the case of M Sreedevi (supra) the Hon'ble Apex Court as well as the High Court in that case had come to the conclusion that the University was in error and, therefore, the seat should have been granted to the petitioner in that case.
The circumstances of the present case are entirely different and distinguishable.
Therefore, this case is of not much help to the petitioner.
7.
We are not able to see any intentional or other error on the part of the University which could persuade us to quash the admission of the candidates who were also meritorious, may be of the lessor merit to the petitioner, but were satisfying the eligibility condition, on or before the last date fixed by the Panjab University, for admission to the course in question.
Another factor which has weighed with us in declining the relief to the petitioner is that the candidates/students who are of lower merit than the petitioner and who have been granted admission by the University nearly two months back, have not been impleaded as parties to this petition, by the petitioner.
It will not be just and proper for this Court to cancel admission of all or any of those students directing admission of petitioner to the course.
8.
For the reasons afore-stated we are unable to grant any relief of the petitioner.
Consequently, this writ petition is dismissed without any order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.