Amar Dutt, J - The petitioner, through present revision, seeks the reversal of the order passed by the Senior Sub Judge, Kapurthala dated 13.1.1990.
It appears that after seeking voluntary retirement, the petitioner found that the release of the pensionary benefits was being delayed and he had filed a suit which was decreed.
Even after this, when the benefits decreed in his favour were not being released, he moved an application for execution of the decree in which at the time of final arguments, he confined his grievance to the failure of the respondent-State to release salary equivalent to 180 days, which according to him, was due on account of leave enacashment.
The execution Court, after hearing the arguments, was of the view that the reliance sought to be placed by the petitioner on Rule 821-A of the Punjab Civil Services Rules (hereinafter referred to as `the Punjab CSR') Volume I Part I, was of little assistance to the case of the petitioner as the same was covered by the provisions of Rule 8122 of Punjab CSR Volume I Part I.
This decision led to the dismissal of the execution application and consequent filing of the revision.
2.
I have heard Shri H.S.
Gill, Assistant Advocate General, Punjab and have perused the provisions of both Rule 821-A and 8122 of the Punjab CSR Volume I Part I.
It is not disputed before me that the case of the petitioner was one where he had sought voluntary retirement.
In this view of the matter, the provision applicable to the case of the petitioner would be Rule 8122 of the Punjab CSR Volume I Part I, according to which, "a Government employee who is granted leave beyond the date of compulsory retirement or quitting of service, as the case may be, shall be entitled during such leave to leave salary as admissible under this rule, reduced by the amount of pension and pension equivalent of other retirement benefits".
This view as has been taken by the executing Court cannot be faulted with.
3.
For the reasons recorded above, this revision petition fails and is, accordingly, dismissed.
Petition dismissed.