RC Kathuria, J - The petitioner has prayed for issuance of a writ of certiorari seeking quashing of the order dated 3091999, copy of which is Annexure-P.5, passed by respondent No. 3 declining the claim of the petitioner for disability pension and for issuance of a direction to the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner for disability pension and grant the same.
2.
The petitioner joined the service of Indian Coast Guard on 511988 as a Navik (Radio Operator).
In the month of January 1989, he was medically diagnosed as a case of generalised seizure/Epilepsy and for that reason placed in low medical category.
In the month of May 1996, the re-categorisation of Medical Board (hereinafter referred to as `the Board') recommended the release of the petitioner from service.
Taking into consideration the recommendations of the Board, the Deputy Director General, Coast Guard, being the competent authority, approved the discharge of the petitioner from service on 10101996.
Thereafter, a Release Medical Board considered the case of the petitioner on 311997 and approved the discharge of the petitioner from service on 2631997.
Resultantly, he was invalidated out of service under Rule 26 of the Coast Guard (General) Rules (hereinafter referred to as `the Rules') on 1551997.
At that stage, he was paid Naval Group Insurance Scheme disability benefits and Service Gratuity/Retirement Gratuity as per Rules.
Aggrieved by the action of respondent No. 2, a representation dated 381999 (Annexure-P.4) was addressed by the petitioner to the Commanding Officer, GGS, Mumbai, wherein it was stated by him that he had developed the disease known as Epilepsy after joining the service, during the period of his service of more than 9 years in the Indian Coast Guard and as this disease is attributable to the service he was entitled to receive all disability benefits.
His representation was considered by respondent No. 2 and rejected on the ground that disability suffered by him was not attributable to service and that the disease suffered by him did not fall in the list of classifications of diseases which can be contracted in service as detailed in Schedule-1-A of Central Civil Services (Extraordinary Pension) Rules (hereinafter referred to `EOP Rules') and the letter dated 3091999 (Annexure-P.5) was communicated to the petitioner in this regard.
It is this letter which has been challenged in the present petition.
3.
On notice of motion, the respondents in their written reply justified the rejection of claim of the petitioner for disability pension on the basis of letter dated 3091999 (Annexure-P.5).
It was pleaded by them that the petitioner had rendered in all 9 years, 4 months and 10 days service and under Rule 49 of the Central Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1972 (hereinafter referred to as `the 1972 Rules'), government servant retiring from service before completing qualifying service of 10 years is not entitled to monthly pension.
As the petitioner was suffering from seizure disorder which disease does not figure in the list Schedule-1-A of the Rules is neither attributable to nor connected with the activities of the service, he was not entitled to the disability benefits claimed by him.
4.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties.
5.
There is no factual dispute between the parties with regard to the total period of 9 years, 4 months and 10 days service rendered by the petitioner as Navik (Radio Operator) when he was discharged by respondent No. 2 on 1551997.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has strenuously urged before me that the disease of Epilepsy was suffered by the petitioner when he was in service and on account of the condition or circumstances prevailed at the place of his posting and for that reason it was attributable to the service as per clarification in guide-lines issued under the 1972 Rules.
Further according to him, it has specifically been provided in Clause 5(b) of the Rules that a disease which led to an individual's discharge will ordinarily be deemed to have been arisen in service if no note of it was made at the time of the individual's acceptance for government service and in this case no such note was recorded at the time when the petitioner entered the service and for that reason his claim for disability pension could not be rejected.
Reliance was placed by him on the observations made in cases Union of India v. Gurnam Singh, 1999(1) S.L.R.
406 and Kulwinder Singh v. Union of India and others, 1999(3) SCT 413 (P&H) : 1999(2) S.L.R.
676.
While controverting the stand of the petitioner, it was forcefully urged by the counsel representing the respondents that the disease of Epilepsy which the petitioner claims to have suffered after he had entered the service does not fall within the classification of diseases which can be contracted in service in terms of the provision of Rule 3(4) read with Schedule-1-A of the Rules and in view of the specific bar of the Rules, there was no option with the respondents but to reject the claim of the petitioner.
Further according to him, the facts of cases upon which reliance has been placed from the side of the petitioner are entirely different as the set of rules governing the petitioner are entirely different from the rules in those cases.
As such, the decisions in those cases are not of any help to the petitioner.
6.
In order to examine the merits of the rival contentions raised before me, a detailed examination of the EOP Rules and guidelines have to be made.
The relevant rules are as under :-  "3.
For the purpose of these rules unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context :- 1 to 3. xx xx xx xx xx 4.
"Disease" means - a disease as is mentioned in Schedule 1-A hereto annexed.
5.
"Pay" means - the pay as defined in Rule 9(21) of the Fundamental Rules, which a person was drawing on the date of his death or injury :  Provided that in the case of a person remunerated by piece-work rates, pay means the average earnings of the last six months ending with the date of his death or injury.
3-A.
(1) (a) Disablement shall be accepted as due to Government service provided, that it is certified that it is due to wound, injury or disease which - (i) is attributable to Government service or (ii) existed before or arose during Government service and has been and remains aggravated thereby.
(2) There shall be a casual connection between :- (a) disablement and Government service, and (b) death and government service, for attributability or aggravation to be conceded.
Guide-lines in this regard are given in the Annexure [at the end of Rules (after Rule 13)] which shall be treated as part and parcel of these Rules."
7.
The guide-lines given in Annexure at the end of the EOP Rules are as under :-  "1.
Rule 3-A covers also cases of death after discharge/invaliding from service.
2.
In deciding on the issue of entitlement, all the evidence (both direct and circumstantial) will be taken into account and the benefit of reasonable doubt will be given to the claimant.
This benefit will be given more liberally to the claimant in field service cases.
3.
Post-discharge claims-cases in which a disease did not actually lead to the government servant's discharge from service but arose within 7 years thereafter may be recognised as attributable to service, if it can be established medically that the disability is a delayed manifestation of a pathological process set in motion by service conditions obtaining prior to discharge and that if the disability had been manifest at the time of discharge, the individual would have been invalided out of service on this account.
In cases where an individual in receipt of a disability pension dies at home, and it cannot, from a strictly medical point of view, be definitely established that the death was solely due to the disablement in respect of which the disability pension was granted - a) the benefit of doubt in determining attributability, should go to the family of the deceased, if death occurs within 7 years from the date of his invalidment from service, unless there are other factors adversely affecting the claim; and b) if death takes place more than 7 years after the date of man's invalidment from service, the benefit of doubt will go to the State.
In cases where an individual outlives a normal span of life, i.e. where death takes place at the age of 60 or above, the death should be held to be due to normal causes and not to government service.
4. xxxx xxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx 5.
In respect of diseases, the following rules will be observed :- a) Cases, in which it is established that conditions of Government service did not determine or contribute to the onset of the disease but influenced the subsequent course of the disease, will fall for acceptance on the basis of aggravation.
b) A disease, which has led to an individual's discharge or death will ordinarily be deemed to have arisen in service if no note of it was made at the time of the individual's acceptance for government service.
However, if medical opinion holds, for reasons to be stated, that the disease could not have been detected on medical examination prior to acceptance for service, the disease will not be deemed to have arisen during service.
c) If a disease is accepted as having arisen in service, it must also be established that the conditions of government service determined or contributed to the onset of the disease and that the conditions were due to the circumstances on duty in Government service.
d) In considering whether a particular disease is due to Government service, it is necessary to relate the established facts, in the actiology of the disease and of its normal development, to the effect that conditions of service, e.g. exposure, stress, climate, etc. may have had on its manifestation.
Regard must also be had to the time factor."
8.
In this case Rule 5 noted above is sought to be made applicable by the petitioner to the controversy because the claim of the petitioner relates to the discharge from service after taking into account the fact that he had suffered Epilepsy disease during this period.
The examination of clause (b) of Rule 5 leaves no manner of doubt that a disease which had led to an individual's discharge from service will ordinarily be deemed to have arisen in service if no note of it was recorded at the time of acceptance for government service.
In this case no such note was recorded by the respondents at the time when the petitioner entered into service of the respondents.
At the same time not only clause (d) of the guide-lines but also sub-clause (4) of Rule 3 have to be read in this regard.
It has been clearly specified in Rule 3(4) that `disease' means a disease as is mentioned in Schedule 1-A annexed thereto.
So is the position specified in clause (d) of the guide- lines because it has been expressly stated in the guide-lines that in considering whether a particular disease is due to Government service, it is necessary to relate the established facts, in the actiology of the disease and of its normal development, to the effect that conditions of service, e.g. exposure, stress, climate etc. may have had on its manifestation.
Due regard has also to be given to the time factor as mentioned in Schedule-1-A.
The patent fact which cannot be ignored in this case is that Epilepsy is not a disease which has to be considered for the purpose of Rule 3 so as to determine the disability and claim for pension of the petitioner.
The Court while considering the claim of the petitioner cannot of its own add any disease to the Schedule because this is the function of the rule making authority.
Despite the fact that Epilepsy was suffered by the petitioner during the period when he was in service with the respondents he would not be entitled to claim disability benefit.
This stand of the respondents is clearly borne out from the rules governing the claim of the petitioner.
9.
Adverting to the case of Union of India v. Gurnam Singh, 1999(1) S.L.R.
406, upon which reliance has been placed from the side of the petitioner, the facts of the case would reveal that Gurnam Singh was enrolled as a Sepoy in the Indian Army on 8.12.1962 and he was discharged from service on 21111970 on the ground that he was suffering from epileptic fits.
He was denied disability pension.
This compelled him to file writ in the High court.
The writ was allowed by the learned Single Judge.
In the LPA filed by the Union of India, the challenge was made to that order by taking into consideration Regulation 173 of the Army Pension Regulations, 1961.
The view taken by the learned Single Judge was upheld by the Division Bench of the High Court.
In Regulation 173 alongwith paragraph 7(b) of Appendix (ii) of the Army Pension Regulations, 1961 it has specifically been mentioned that unless otherwise specifically provided, a disability pension may be granted to an individual who is invalided from service on account of disability which is attributable or aggravated by military service and is assessed at 20% or over.
It was also mentioned therein that the question whether disability is attributable or aggravated by the military service shall be determined under the Rules in Appendix (II).
As already noticed the provisions of Rule 3(4) which defines diseases as mentioned in Schedule 1-A of the Rules have placed limitation with regard to the entitlement of the petitioner and, therefore, different set of rules govern the case of the petitioner.
10.
Coming to the other case in Kulwinder Singh v. Union of India and others, 1999(2) S.L.R.
676, the petitioner had suffered from Neurosis I CD 300 and was denied disability benefit taking into account Regulations 173, 183 and 186 of the Army Pension Regulations, 1961.
Thus the facts of the above mentioned cases are clearly distinguishable from the facts of the present case.
11.
For the reasons stated above, there is no merit in the writ petition and the same is accordingly dismissed.
Petition dismissed.