Bakhshish Kaur, J (Oral) - The petitioner prays fro issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari to quash the Instructions dated July 17, 1992 as the facility of reimbursement of outdoor medical treatment expenses has been restricted to Rs. 1200/- per annum and further directions be issued to reimburse the total amount of Rs. 17,600/- to him.
2.
The petitioner is suffering from Prolapse Inter Vertebral Disc (in short `PIVD').
His wife Smt. Jasbir Kaur is suffering from Cervical Disc Syndrome.
They needed specialised treatment which was not available over here, therefore, the Director General, health Services, Haryana, as per letters Annexures P-1 and P-2 addressed to the Principal Medical Officer, General Hospital, Hissar, gave approval for referring the petitioner and his wife to the Medial Specialist at the All India Institute of Medical Sciences (hereinafter referred to as `AIIMS') for consultation and treatment.
3.
The petitioner and his wife were subjected to various tests in AIIMS and one of the tests was x-ray laboratory test, for which the petitioner had incurred expenses of Rs. 6000/- while his wife and incurred expenses of Rs. 11,600/-, as per certificates Annexures P-3 and P-4, respectively.
4.
The petitioner had claimed reimbursement of the aforesaid amount by submitting the requisite bills to the Registrar, Punjab and Haryana High Court, Chandigarh.
The Registrar forwarded these bills to the Chief Secretary to Government of Haryana, Chandigarh, who in turn declined to reimburse the amount on the basis of the Instructions contained in Haryana Government's letter No. 2/59/88-1HB-III dated July 17, 1992, vide which the petitioner can be granted reimbursement on medical treatment of Rs. 1200/- by the High Court out of the total amount of Rs. 17,600/-.
Thus, the medical bill was returned in original.
The Instructions issued by the Government of Haryana are contained in Annexure P-7.
5.
The learned State counsel resisting this petition has contended that the petitioner and his wife are not entitled to the reimbursement of the amount in question, particularly in view of the Instructions, referred to above, because they are not getting any treatment.
They have simply undergone certain tests at AIIMS.
They have simply undergone certain tests at AIIMS.
They have also not produced any bills or the prescription slips that they are getting treatment as a follows-up action.
6.
It is the true that the petitioner and his wife are not suffering from the chronic disease but the nature of treatment required to be taken was specialised one and this facility was not available in the State of Haryana.
For that reason, both were referred to AIIMS by virtue of the letters Annexures P-1 and P-2.
If any test is undergone and that too of x-ray laboratory tests, the petitioner cannot be denied the reimbursement of the said amount because the authorities concerned are quite aware of the fact that the requisite facilities are not available here, therefore, they have referred them to AIIMS.
Carrying out the tests of various nature is a preliminary step to diagnose the disease and then prescribe the treatment.
7.
The word "treatment" has been fairly described and discussed in Renu Saigal v. The State of Haryana through Commissioner and Secretary, Department of Architecture, Haryana, Chandigarh and others, (1998-3) 120 P.L.R.
666 : 1998(4) SCT 565 (P&H).
The observations made by Hon'ble Mr. Justice HS Bedi, while dealing with the word "treatment" need to be reproduced as under :-  "A cumulative reading of the word "treatment" along with the other observations mentioned above, clearly makes out that a government servant shall be entitled to free of charge treatment in a hospital and the exceptions, if any, with regard to Board etc. have been specifically carved out in the rules themselves.
It will also be seen that no distinction whatsoever has been made in the Rules with regard to reimbursement of medical expenses between indoor and outdoor patients and this has been drawn under paragraph 3 ibid.
It is, therefore, apparent that the said instructions insofar as they deny full reimbursement of medical expenses incurred on chronic disease to an outdoor patient cannot be justified as they are contrary to the Rules.
The word "chronic" has been defined in Butterworths Medical Dictionary (Second Edition) as a disease long continued.
It is common knowledge that a chronic disease and more particularly a malignant one destroys not only the financial but even the emotional health of the family and takes a very heavy toll on all who come into contact with the patient.
To my mind, therefore, paragraph 3 of the Government Instructions Annexure P-9, insofar as they deny the benefit of full reimbursement of medical expenses incurred on account of treatment as an outdoor patient cannot be justified on the touchstone of Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution as well as Ram Lubhaya Bagga's case (supra), therefore, cannot come to the aid of the respondents."
8.
My attention has also been drawn to a Division Bench judgment of this Court in CWP.
No. 15938 of 1998 Jagir Singh v. P.S.E.B.
and others, decided on February 1, 1999.
It was a case of kidney failure where the petitioner was put on dialysis and he was allowed medical reimbursement as an outdoor patient.
9.
In the given case in hand, particularly when the authorities concerned knowingly referred the case of the petitioner and his wife on account of non- availability of the facility, the petitioner cannot be denied the right of reimbursement of the amount incurred on the tests.
I am of the considered view that the general instructions Annexure P-7 dated 17.7.1992 insofar as they deny the benefit of full reimbursement of medical expenses incurred on account of the tests carried out for the specialised tests/treatment which is not available in the State of Haryana but available at AIIMS only, cannot be termed as justiciable.
The respondent is bound to reimburse the Medical expenses.
10.
For the aforesaid reasons, the petition is allowed to the extent of reimbursement of medical expenses.
The respondent is directed to reimburse the full amount of Rs. 17,600/- being the medical expenses incurred by the petitioner and his wife at AIIMS.
The needful be done within a period of one month from the date of receipt of a certified copy of the order.
Petition allowed.