RL Anand, J. (Oral) - Smt. Kamla Devi, a Sanskrit Teacher, has filed the present writ petition and she has claimed the benefit of additional increment on completion of 8 and 18 years of service as per Government Instructions dated 781992 and the higher standard pay scale on completion of 10 years of service as provided to Group C and D employees as per Financial Department Haryana letter dated 821994.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that earlier she was on adhoc service.
Subsequently her services were regularised and on completion of 8 and 18 years of service, she is entitled to the proficiency step up and higher standard of pay.
Hence the present petition.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents who filed the reply and denied the allegations.
According to the respondents, the petitioner is not entitled to the benefit because she was appointed as Sanskrit Teacher on adhoc basis w.e.f.
13th August, 1981 and her services were regularised w.e.f.
1st November, 1986.
As the services of the petitioner have been regularised on 1st November, 1986, she is not entitled to the grant of one additional increment with effect from 1st July, 1992 and higher standard pay scale with effect from 1st January, 1994.
Therefore, this writ petition is liable to be dismissed on this score.
4.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance, have gone through the record of this case.
5.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has vehemently submitted that the adhoc service rendered by the petitioner should be considered for the purpose of higher standard pay scale and, in these circumstances, the petitioner is entitled to the benefit of his previous adhoc service to be counted w.e.f.
13.8.1981 till her services were made regular w.e.f.
1111986.
6.
On the contrary, the learned counsel for the respondents has invited my attention to a judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court passed in Civil Appeal No. 6525 of 1998, (State of Punjab and others v. Harjinder Kaur and others) decided on February 20, 2001 in which it has been laid down that the benefit of adhoc service cannot be granted to the employee for the purpose of proficiency step up and higher standard of pay after 8 or 18 years of service.
The reliance was placed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court on its earlier judgment State of Haryana v. Haryana Veterinary and AHTS Association and another, 2000(8) SCC 4 : 2000(4) SCT 664 (SC).
7.
I have considered the rival contentions of the parties and am of the opinion that the controversy in hand is fully covered by the ratio of the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court dated 20th February, 2001 given in Civil Appeal No. 6525 of 1998, (State of Punjab and others v. Harjinder Kaur and others) (supra) wherein the Hon'ble Supreme Court observed as under:  "The respondents were initially appointed on adhoc basis without following the procedure prescribed under the Recruitment Rules and without referring their case to the Punjab Public Service Commission.
Subsequently their services were regularised and fresh appointment orders were issued.
The question formulated above arose when the employees claimed higher scale of pay under the scheme and wanted the adhoc service rendered by them to be included for counting 8 or 18 years of requisite service.
On persual of the papers and on the consideration of the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties we are satisfied that this case is covered by the decision in the State of Haryana v. Haryana Veterinary and AHTS Association and another (supra).
Accordingly, the appeals are allowed and the judgments/orders under challenge are set aside.
We make it clear that if any of the respondents has drawn any amount on the basis of the step up pay granted to counting the adhoc service following the judgment/order passed by the High Court the State shall not recover the amount drawn by him.
But regarding the fixation/determination of cadre seniority the position laid down in this order will govern.
No costs.
8.
In this view of the matter, I do not see any merit in this writ petition which is hereby dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Appeals allowed.