Satya Brata Sinha, J - This application is directed against the judgment and order dated 2572000 passed by the West Bengal Administrative Tribunal in OA No. 4712 of 1999 whereby and whereunder the petitioner's application was dismissed.
The petitioner is a Police Constable.
He has been transferred by reason of an order dated 26.3.1999.
He filed an application before the learned Tribunal questioning the said order which was marked as OA No. 2978 of 1999 and by an order dated 7.5.1999 the learned Tribunal relying upon the provisions of Police Regulations 28(a) and 30(a) disposed of the said application directing :  "After hearing the submissions of the learned Advocates of both sides and on perusing the application together with the Annexures thereto, I dispose of this application by directing the respondents, particularly, respondent No. 3, to treat the application together with the Annexures thereto, as a representation from the applicant and to dispose it by passing a speaking order according to law within 2 weeks from the date of communication of this order, after giving the applicant an opportunity of being heard.
The order so passed by respondent No. 3 shall be communicated to the applicant within a week from the date of passing of the order."
Pursuant to or in furthermore of the said order, the Deputy Commissioner of Police, Headquarters, Calcutta, has passed an order dated 23.6.1999 stating :  "As per the direction of the Hon'ble Mr. Justice R Kharlukhi of State Administrative Tribunal, I have treated the application of Constable Maheswar Singh together with the Annexures as representation.
I have gone through all relevant papers and rules and regulations.
I find that the transfer order passed was in keeping with the existing rules and regulations.
It does not violate rule 30 or 28 of Chapter XVII of P.R.C.
Rule 28(a) actually states that "without special orders of the Commissioner, no member of the force, of and below the rank of Inspector, shall remain at a time longer than two years in any station or more than five years in a division or unit".
Hence, the order of transfer is kept intact in the interest of public service."
Thereafter the petitioner filed another application which by reason of the impugned order has been dismissed.
2.
The learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner, inter alia, submits that having regard to the earlier order dated 7.5.1999 passed by the learned Tribunal itself the Deputy Commissioner of Police was required to assign reason and as the aforementioned order is not supported by any reason, the same could not be sustained.
According to the learned Counsel, the learned Tribunal misdirected in law insofar as it has failed to consider the reason which is required to be assigned, as the same is mandatory in nature as would appear from Regulation 28(q) of the Police Regulation.
3.
The learned Counsel for the petitioner however submits that the learned Tribunal further misdirected itself in holding that as in the meantime the period of 2 years is already over, no interference is called for although an employee is entitled to be posted in a particular division for a period of 5 years.
Regulations 28(a) and 30(a) of the Police Regulations read thus :  "28(a).
Without special orders of the Commissioner, no member of the force, of and below the rank of Inspector, shall remain at a time longer than two years in any station or more than five years in a division or unit.
30(a).
The number of transfers should be reduced to a minimum.
The exigencies of sickness, leave, promotion, retirements, serious misconduct and other unpreventable causes make a certain number of changes unavoidable.
The Deputy Commissioners should therefore, abstain from making or recommending transfer unless unavoidable."
Mr. Ghosh, learned Counsel for the petitioner in support of his aforementioned contention has relied upon the decisions of the Apex Court in the case of SN Mukherjee v Union of India, reported in 1991(1) SCT 241 (SC) : AIR 1990 SC 1984 and Union of India v. D Mohan and others, reported in 1995(2) SCT 196 (SC) : 1995(3) SCC 115.
4.
It is now a well settled principle of law that transfer is an incidence of service and not a condition of service.
In terms of the provisions of the Police Act a person is liable to serve anywhere within the territory of the State as and when he is directed to do so.
The Police Regulation of Bengal which is a subordinate legislation must, therefore, be read in conjunction with the provisions laid down in the Police Act.
5.
Regulation 28(a) of the Police Regulation clearly indicates the maximum period for which a person should be posted in any station would not be more than 2 (two) years and in any division or unit not more than 5 (five) years.
By reason of the aforementioned provision, a member of the Police Force does not derive any legal right to remain in one station for a period of 2 (two) years and in division or unit at least for a period of 5 (five) years.
It is, therefore, clear that even before the expiry of the period of 2 (two) years or 5 (five) years a Constable can be transferred from any station or division or unit as the case may be.
Regulation 30(a) of the said Regulation only provides for a guideline and the same by any means cannot be said to be mandatory in nature and an order passed in deviation of such guidelines therefore does not confer any legal right upon the petitioner to question the order of transfer.
Furthermore, it is well settled principle of law that the principle of natural justice has two principles limbs or pillars, viz. (a) No person shall be condemned unheard; and (b) No body shall be judged of his own cause.
The third limb or the pillar of the principle of natural justice which is assignment of reasons is merely a judge-made law and is not the basic pillar of the principles of natural justice.
In any event, by reason of the aforementioned order dated 7.5.1999 the learned Tribunal did not mean that an elaborate speaking order should be passed.
The question which fell for consideration before the Deputy Commissioner of Police, Headquarters, Calcutta was as to whether the order of transfer was violative of Regulations 28(a) and 30(a) of Chapter XVIII of Police Regulation or not.
It was found having regard to the provisions thereof that the same was not.
Furthermore, the learned Tribunal itself has refused to exercise its discretion, keeping in view the limited scope of judicial review in the matter of transfer, that even the period of two years to remain in one station was over by reason of an interim order passed by the learned Tribunal itself.
6.
Having regard to the fact that the learned Tribunal has refused to exercise its discretion in the matter, we are of the opinion that no case has been made out for this court to interfere therewith.
7.
It appears from the decision of the Apex Court in the case of M Mohan (supra) that therein a rule relating to transfer of employee was made having regard to the transfer of a territory.
Keeping in view the fact that the said rule was made with a view to avoiding hardship to the individuals, the Apex Court was of the view that individual options should be called for and taken into consideration before the order of transfer could have been passed.
The said decision in the fact of the present case cannot be said to have any application whatsoever.
By reason of an order of transfer from one station to another, no person can be said to be deprived of a legal right.
Even if an order of transfer creates some hardship, the same being an incidence of service by itself cannot be a ground for interference when the order of transfer is held to be valid.
It is well settled principle of law that an order of transfer should not be interfered with by the High Court in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India unless the same is mala fide or has been passed for extraneous consideration or in violation of the mandatory provision of the statute.
None of the aforementioned ground is attracted in the present case.
8.
For the reason aforementioned, there is no merit in this application which is accordingly dismissed.
Petition dismissed.