Satyabrata Sinha, J - Although the learned counsel for the parties were heard at length, we are of the opinion that this writ application can be disposed of as the fact in on harrow compass.
2.
The only question which arises for consideration before us is as to whether the learned Tribunal was correct in invoking the principle of res-judicata.
It appears that in the earlier proceeding which is said to be binding on the petitioner herein the learned Tribunal directed :  "Such a removal order by a stroke of pen has washed away all the benefits admissible to him for his past 34 years of service and even if he is subsequently legally presumed dead, his family cannot get family pension under the rules.
It is clear from the reply of the respondents that the entire DA proceedings were carried out against the petitioner's husband ex-parte.
He could not even be served with either the charge-sheet or the penalty order since he was not available at his residence.
15.
Under the circumstances, even if certain penalty had to be imposed to him, it would have in the interest of fair play and equity that it was maximum of the order of compulsory retirement from service so that the retiral benefits because of 34 years' past service of the petitioner's husband and his family are not denied to him or to his family.
16.
While making the above observations, we are aware of the fact as part of the present OA We cannot give any directive in the above lines since in the instant case the relief sought for is compassionate appointment and not the retiral benefits family pension on the DA proceedings."
Pursuant to or in furtherance of the special leave having been granted by the learned Tribunal in OA No. 265/92 along with MP No. 40/92 the petitioner filed the present writ application.
Keeping in view the fact that the writ application was filed in view of the leave granted by the learned Tribunal itself, in our opinion, the question of invoking the principle of res-judicata does not arise.
Furthermore, it is well settled principle of law that if an order is passed without jurisdiction, the principle of res-judicata which is a procedural law will have no application.
Reference in this connection may be made to AIR 1997 SC 193.
In the case of N Annappa v. State of Karnataka, reported in 2000(1) SCT 1113 (SC) : 1999(5) SCC 193, the Apex Court held :  "3.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and having perused the records, we find that when on an earlier occasion the appellant approached the Tribunal, the Tribunal rejected the application of the appellant by observing as follows : "For want of any material, it is not possible for us to consider the application before us.
Hence we dismissed this application keeping open all the contentions raised."
4.
From the aforesaid observation, it is clear that the Tribunal did not dismiss the application of the appellant on merits, more so, kept all the contentions raised in the application to be agitated subsequently.
In view of the said fact, it was not correct on the part of the Tribunal and the High Court to have rejected the second application on the ground that the second application was barred by the principle of res judicata.
We, accordingly, set aside the orders dated 13198 and 27.1.1998 and send the matter back to the Tribunal for deciding Application No. 5949 of 1996 filed by the appellant on merits.
The appeal is allowed accordingly.
However, there shall be no order as to costs."
Mr. Majumder, learned counsel, appearing on behalf of the respondent however submits that in the order the learned Tribunal only held that the quantum of punishment may be a subject-matter of consideration and thus no interference has been made with regard to the order of punishment.
3.
There cannot be any doubt whatsoever that even if an order of compulsory retirement could have been passed, the petitioner herein might have been entitled to the grant of retiral benefit and other terminal benefits.
4.
Mr. Majumder, learned counsel for the respondent has relied upon a decision of the Apex Court in the case Ajit Chopra v. Sudhu Ram, reported in AIR 2000 SC 212.
In the said decision the Apex Court while dealing with the matter relating to the claim of adverse possession, inter alia, held :-  "32.
In our view, the decisions in Kutti Ali, (1990) ILR 23 Mad 629 and in Amina, AIR 1949 Mad.
815, were directly in point and are correctly decided.
Both relate to an earlier suit based on a lease when the execution of the decree was time-barred and the second suit was based on title.
The second suit was held neither barred by Section 47, CPC nor by Section 11, CPC.
So far as mortgage cases are concerned, the position stood settled long back by the decision of the Privy Council in Raghunath Singh's case, AIR 1934 PC 205 as explained in the Full Bench in Viroopakshan, AIR 1937 Mad 214.
In fact, this court approved the Privy Council judgment in Raghunath Singh and held that a second suit for redemption was maintainable even if the earlier decree for redemption stood barred by limitation.
(See Mhadagonda Ramgonda Patil v. Shripal Balwant Rainade, (1988)3 SCC 298 : AIR 1988 SC 1200, Maganlal v. Jaiswal Industries, Neemach, (1989)4 SCC 344 : AIR 1989 SC 2113 and Harbans Singh v. Gurnam Ditta Singh, (1991)2 SCC 523.
We, accordingly held on the above line of cases that the present suit is not barred by Section 11 or Section 47 of the Code of Civil Procedure."
Thus even in the aforementioned case the principle of res judicata had not been held to be applicable.
5.
For the reason aforementioned, the impugned order cannot be sustained which is set aside accordingly.
This application is allowed and the matter is remitted back to the learned Tribunal for consideration on merit afresh.
6.
We hope and trust that the learned Tribunal will dispose of the matter as expeditiously as possible and preferably within a period of two months from the date of communication of this order.
7.
Urgent xerox certified copy of this order, if applied for, be supplied on priority basis.
Application allowed.