RL Anand, J - Shri Kulwant Singh has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India and he has prayed for the quashment of the order dated 1831991 vide which the disability pension of the petitioner has been rejected and the petitioner has further made a prayer that directions be issued to the respondents authority to release the disability pension alongwith interest at the rate of 18%.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he was enrolled in the army on 11.12.1984 and at the time of his enrolment a medical test was conducted and no fault was found by the medical authorities with his health and he was placed in A category.
Thereafter, he developed problem.
He remained posted at various stations such as Siachin Glacier.
He took part in various operations of the military in the year 1987 and 1988.
After serving about 6 years and 6 months, he was invalidated from the service on account of medical ground on 2561990.
He applied for disability pension but it was rejected on the plea that his disability was not attributable to the military service.
3.
Aggrieved by the order dated 1831991 he filed an appeal on 2861991 which was rejected.
He even served notices dated 16.4.1992 and 1291992 but to no effect.
The disability, according to him, was brain tumour (Cerebral Tumor).
4.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents who denied the allegations and the stand taken by the respondent-authorities is that the disability suffered by the petitioner is not attributable to the army service.
5.
I have heard Shri Sandeep Majithia, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner and Shri Anil Malhotra, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents and with their assistant have gone through the record of the case.
6.
As I have stated above the disease suffered by the petitioner is Cerebral Tumour.
The point which survives for determination is whether this type of deformity suffered by the petitioner is attributable to the army service or not ?
7.
It is true that the respondents have taken the stand on the basis of some medical opinion.
This Court would like to say in this case that let the respondents authorities reconstitute a new medical board near the residence of the petitioner.
The Board be constituted including the Neuro Physician and Neuro Surgeon and the other members of the Board will be medical specialists.
If this Board comes to the conclusion that the disease suffered by the petitioner is even remotely related to the army service, in such a situation, the directions are given to the respondents-authority to release the disability pension of the petitioner within three months from the date of the opinion formulated by such Board.
If the opinion of the Board, unfortunately, goes against the petitioner, in such a situation, the petitioner can again approach the High Court for seeking the relief, if open to him according to law.
There shall be no orders as to costs.
Let the copy of this order be given to the counsel for the parties on payment for compliance of the directions.
The petitioner shall appear before the newly constituted board at the specified date, time and place which will be intimated by the Board to the petitioner and this Board shall be constituted within three months from the receipt of the copy of this order.
8.
With the aforesaid observations, the present petition stands disposed of.
Order accordingly.