RL Anand, J. (Oral) - Avtar Singh, petitioner, has filed the present writ petition against the respondents under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, for issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing respondents 1 to 3 to declare him as a successful candidate in the Co-ordinator Entrance Test held by the Punjabi University, Patiala, and the petitioner has also prayed for issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari quashing the appointment of the candidate/candidates who are lower in merit than him.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that respondents No. 1-University, called application for the course of Post Graduate Diploma in Computer Application.
The petitioner applied for Punjabi University Extension Library which had 30 seats, out of which 50% seats were reserved for the employed candidates.
The Entrance examination was held on 29.6.1999 and the merit position of the petitioner was 586.
The petitioner received a letter dated 21.7.1999 and was informed that the interview will take place on 3071999.
On that day, the interview was held.
It was conducted by the Selection Committee.
In the case of the petitioner, the Selection Committee, after going through the certificates, told the petitioner to submit his proof of Punjab Residence Certificate.
The petitioner showed a letter dated 2861999 issued by his employer that the petitioner is working as Technical Grade-III since March, 1990 in Semi Conductor Complex Limited, Mohali, but the Selection Committee asked the petitioner to show the Punjab Residential Proof Certificate issued by the competent authority/Tehsildar.
The petitioner made a request to the Selection Committee to give some time to bring the Punjab Residence Proof Certificate as they had already given time to one Harpinder Singh and Sukhdev Singh.
Incidently, both these candidates were also working with the petitioner in the same factory.
The grouse of the petitioner is that the second counselling took place on 691999.
On that day, the petitioner took the requisite proof of domicile certificate and it was shown to the Committee but the petitioner was not selected on that day.
On that day, Harpinder Singh and Sukhdev Singh were selected along with Paramjit Singh.
The grouse of the petitioner further is that the merit rank of Paramjit Singh is lower than that of him.
The number of Paramjit Singh in the merit is 621 whereas the merit No. of the petitioner was 586.
With these allegations, the petitioner has filed the present writ petition.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
A separate written statement was filed on behalf of respondents No. 1 to 4.
According to these respondents, the petitioner appeared for interview on 3071999.
According to the rules for admission to the Post Graduate Diploma in Computer Application, all the seats are reserved for Punjab Residents only.
The petitioner did not produce any document to that effect.
Further, the petitioner sought admission under the employee category.
He also did not produce any document in this regard.
Hence, the seat was not given to him.
Harpinder Singh and Sukhdev Singh were selected under the employees quota because they were having proof to this effect.
The dates mentioned in their documents were very old, therefore, they were asked to produce employee certificate in current date to make sure that they were employees at the time of appearing for interview, i.e. on 3071999.
The petitioner did not show any proof of his being an employee at the time of the interview, i.e. on 3071999.
The petitioner did not show any letter dated 2861999 issued by his employer as mentioned in the writ petition.
In short, the grouse of respondents No. 1 to 4 is that the petitioner was not having the requisite documents on 3071999 and, therefore, he was not considered for selection.
4.
Respondent No. 5 also filed a separate written statement and he adopted the line of respondents No. 1 to 4.
5.
A rejoinder was filed by the petitioner in which he reiterated his allegations made in the writ petition by denying those of the written statement.
6.
The sole point for determination is whether the petitioner was having the requisite documents on 3071999 and the answer of the Court will be that on that day, the petitioner had the requisite certificate of his employer but he was not having the requisite domicile certificate.
However, in the present case, the second conselling was adjourned to 691999 and by that date, the petitioner had procured the domicile certificate, which was issued in his favour on 281999 (Annexure P-4).
It is also clear that the petitioner had the requisite certificate of his employer which was issued in his favour on 2861999 (Annexure P-1).
It is the admitted case of the respondents that on 691999, the University gave admission to Harpinder Singh, Sukhdev Singh and Paramjit Singh, respondent No. 5.
So far as the merit of Harpinder Singh and Sukhdev Singh is concerned, it was higher in rank than that of the petitioner but the fact is that the University accommodated Harpinder Singh and Sukhdev Singh on 691999 when they had no proper documents on 3071999.
If Harpinder Singh and Sukhdev Singh could be accommodated for 691999, the University could also accommodate the petitioner.
On 691999, the University gave admission to Paramjit Singh, whose rank was lower than that of the petitioner.
In these circumstances, the action of the respondents in giving admission to respondent No. 5 Paramjit Singh was illegal.
7.
Now, the ancillary question which arises for determination is should this Court disqualify Paramjit Singh, respondent No. 5 or not and whether this Court should give directions to the University to accommodate the petitioner in the next course or not ?
8.
The course was of one year, which is already complete.
In these circumstances, it will be unfair on the part of the High Court to disturb the admission of Paramjit Singh.
The petitioner has to be accommodated.
Therefore, directions are given to respondents No. 1 to 3 to give admission to the petitioner in the said course for the year 2000-2001.
This relief has been given to the petitioner to do justice with him as a wrong has already been done to the petitioner by respondents No. 1 to 3.
This Court is not inclined to burden respondents No. 1 to 3 with any compensation.
9.
The writ petition stands allowed in the above terms with no orders as to costs.
Petition allowed.