Syed Bashir-ud-Din, J - Petitioner a Jr.
Engineer in P.D.D.
is questioning his adjustment/transfer vide office order No. CE/PMM/86 of 1999 dated 10699 of Chief Engineer, Procurement and Material Management, Jammu-respondent No. 1 (annexure-B), on the ground that the petitioner has a threat to his life in the background of being brother of Late Ghulam Mohmmad Mir Magami, Ex-Member of Parliament from Srinagar.
His brother's affiliation to Congress party, is not taken in the stride by the militant organisations.
Besides the said impugned order is in fact a review of order dated 8699 of Development Commissioner (Power) (Annexure-A) by Chief Engineer an inferior officer.
The order is not passed in the interests of administration.
2.
Respondents in their objection have contended that under the impugned order "petitioner has been adjusted in Electric Purchase Circle-II, Srinagar from Electric Central Store Division Srinagar and these offices are situated at stone's throw from each other".
The transfer is in fact an adjustment order consequent on transfer order (annexure A) by Development Commissioner Power respondent No. 2.
It is denied that the impugned order is in any way a review of the order of Development Commissioner.
Petitioner has been adjusted and shifted to Srinagar as a case of longer stay, where he is more secure.
While ordering his transfer, under impugned order, petitioner's threat perception has been taken care of.
3.
Petitioner's name does not figure in order dated 8699 of Development Commissioner Power (annexure-A).
He is not transferred under order.
The order dated 10699 of Chief Engineer (annexure-B) speaks that as follow up to the transfer order Annexure-A, the adjustment/transfer among others of petitioner is made to EPO-II, Srinagar from ECSD Srinagar.
Obviously the transfer of petitioner is within the district Srinagar.
The transfer is not a case of review of order of superior by an inferior officer.
The threat perception or personal problems of petitioner though definitely a matter for the employer- respondent, cannot be a ground to strike down the adjustment/transfer order.
No plea with material is on record to show that the impugned order is mala fide or passed in violation of rules and guidelines or unjustifiable.
Transfer is the normal consequence and incident of service.
In B Varadha Rao's case (AIR 1986 SC 1955), the Apex Court observed :-  ".....
It is well understood that transfer of a Government servant who is appointed to a particular cadre of transferable points from one place to another is an ordinary incident of service and therefore does not result in any alteration of any of the conditions of service to his disadvantage.
That a Government servant is liable to be transferred to a similar post in the same cadre is a normal feature and incident of Government service and no Govt. servant can claim to remain in a particular place or in a particular post unless, of course, his appointment itself is to a specified, non-transferable post....." 4.
It State of Punjab v. Joginder Singh Dhatt, AIR 1993 SC 2486 : 1995(4) SCT 225 (SC) it is pointed out :-  "....
It is entirely for the employer to decide when, where and at what point of time a public servant is transferred from his present posting.
Ordinarily the Courts have no jurisdiction to interfere with the order of transfer.
The High Court grossly erred in quashing the order of transfer of the respondent from Hoshiarpur to Sangrur.
The High Court was not justified in extending its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India is a matter where on the face of it, no injustice was caused."
5.
For the aforesaid reasons, while dismissing the writ petition, it is observed that the State of J&K and all concerned may initiate action and take steps required of them to give protection to the life and property of the petitioner, if approached for the purpose.
And the respondents/Authorities of the Power Development Department may also take steps as may be warranted by the objective consideration of the matter, so far as safe posting of petitioner in the department is concerned.
Petition dismissed.