TS Doabia, J - Petitioner is seeking appointment as Constable.
He stands selected.
However, certificate which is required to be given in terms of Rule 17(d) of the Jammu and Kashmir Civil Service Regulation has not been granted.
This is not so granted as petitioner was said to have been detained under Public Safety Act.
2.
It be seen that no specific order has been passed.
Learned counsel appearing for the petitioner submits that until and unless activity of a person is found to be such which can disable himself to join the Government Service, letter of appointment cannot be denied.
3.
It be seen that each and every criminal offence cannot have the effect of disqualifying the candidate.
The question of moral delinquency and the question as to whether the offence was such which involved moral turpitude or not may also have to be taken into consideration.
Some judicial precedents do exist that merely because a person stands convicted under the Penal Provisions, it would not give rise to a conclusion that the offender is guilty of moral delinquency.
The circumstances under which the offence was committed have to be taken into consideration.
Reference in this regard be made to Corpus Juris Secundum.
The relevant extract is as under :-  "While frequently general statements have been made to the effect that mere assault does not or may not involve moral turpitude or the assault and battery rarely involve moral turpitude, the rule would seem to be that assault and battery may involve more turpitude and it may not, the difference depending on the circumstances, and whether an assault does or does not involve moral turpitude generally will be determined by the particular facts of the individual case.
The statutes of various jurisdictions divide assaults in the different degrees and many of the crimes which are included within such definitions are crimes that involve moral turpitude.
Homicide may or may not involve moral turpitude depending on the degree of the crime."
This aspect of the matter was considered in case reported as Brij Kishore Shukla v. M.P.S.R.T.
Corporation, 1996(1) SCT 254 (MP).
In para 8 of the order following observations were made :-  "When can it be said that an offence involves moral turpitude.
The term moral turpitude has not been defined either in the Act or in the Indian Penal Code.
According to the New Lexicon Webster's Dictionary of the English Language `turpitude' means inherent wickedness.
The concept of moral turpitude as stated in Black's Law Dictionary is that it involves baseness, vileness or the depravity in private and social duties which a man owes to his fellowman or to society, in general, contrary to accepted and customary rule of right and duty between man and man.
Thus it is an act or behaviour that gravely violates moral sentiments or accepted moral standards of the community and is a morally culpable quality held to be present in some criminal offences as distinguished from others.
In other word it is the quality of a crime involving grave infringement of the moral sentiment of the community as distinguished from statutory prohibitions.
If one were to look at the matter in a very narrow sense or in general term, of righteousness, society does not permit or approve of any offence being committed.
It has to be borne in mind that every act punishable in law is not offence involving moral turpitude.
It appears to me that a circumstance in which a crime is committed and how the society views the commission of that offence in those circumstances is relevant.
The question whether offence involves moral turpitude would depend upon a number of circumstances.
Drinking or gambling in a school may not involve.
If, however, a school teacher does these acts, the position would be different.
An offence committed under one set of circumstances may involve moral turpitude and the same offence committed under a different set of circumstances may not.
For instance, a person who goes to commit theft or rape may not be able to achieve his object and on being caught may kill the person apprehending him.
Such an offence of murder committed under these circumstances would certainly involve moral turpitude as it involves depravity or wickedness of character and crime involves grave infringement of the community as distinguished from statutory prohibitions.
Offence of murder committed due to enmity may not per se involve baseness of character.
It is a matter of common knowledge that in many societies people do sometimes commit murder with a view to avenge their enmity and such murders are not looked down upon as involving that baseness or depravity of character as to amount to moral turpitude.
In other words this conduct by itself cannot be said to possess morally culpable quality which is present in those criminal offences which involve moral turpitude.
The offence of murder was held to be an offence involving no moral turpitude by a Division Bench of Punjab and Haryana High Court in Kuldeep Singh v. State of Punjab, 1994(3) SCT 15 (P&H) (DB) and it was observed that an `Act of Killing' a person is normally attributed to a feeling of hurt or revenge; act of murder will not come within the broad concept of moral turpitude as interpreted by Court."
4.
Reliance is also being placed on a decision given by this court in S.W.P.
No. 1071 of 1996 decided on 27th of February, 1997.
In the above case decisions reported as Subrata Kumar Chatterjee v. Deputy Chief Accounts Officer, Eastern Railway and other, AIR 1958 Calcutta 654, K George v. The State of Kerala, AIR 1964 Kerala 238, Padmanabha Pillai Krishna Pillai v. Damodaran Vasudevan, AIR 1965 Kerala 18 and State of Kerala v. KA Balan, 1976(1) SLR 94 were distinguished.
5.
It be seen that in another decision in S.W.P.
No. 1223 of 1996 decided on 12th of May, 1997 the petition was allowed and direction was given to the official respondents to pass appointment order and to take him in service.
It was further observed :  "However, it shall be open to the competent authority to deal with the matter in accordance with the rules, in case he is convicted by any criminal court.
His seniority shall reckon from the date his co-selectees were appointed in order of merit but this shall not entitled him to any pecuniary benefit."
Earlier it was said :-  "The respondents submit that formal order of appointment would be issued after verification of the certificates and on the satisfaction of the appointing authority regarding the petitioner's character and antecedents in terms of Rule 17(d) of the J&K Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1956 (1956 Rules) and the J&K Civil Services (Verification of Character and Antecedents).
Instructions of 1969 sanctioned vide Govt. Order No. Home 559-IS of 1969 dated 1891969 which empower the Appointing Authority to satisfy himself about the character and antecedent of a candidate before making his appointment."
"In this scenario all that remains to be seen is : whether the respondents were justified in withholding the appointment order of the petitioner in the facts and circumstances of the case in light of rule 17(d) of the 1956 Rules and the Govt. instructions contained in Govt. order No. Home-559/IS of 1969."
"The appointing authority cannot keep the matter in cold storage and hold the available `adverse material' close to his chest without formation of any opinion on such material and taking appropriate action supported by reasons to disentitle a selected candidates from appointment.
Such a course of action would be wholly and grossly arbitrary infringing the right of equality of employment of a candidate at his back."
"The requirement of passing of the order by the appointing authority on the basis of available material becomes necessary to ensure that the selected candidate is not deprived of his employment on an extraneous consideration or relevant (irrelevant) material.
The verification of antecedants and character of a candidate through the police agency may throw up material which may not be relevant to his suitability for the job or which may be extraneous to the nature of his duties attached to the post.
The selected candidate in such a situation, cannot be shown the door merely because the verification had disclosed some secret information about him."
It was further observed :-  "Such pendency which could also result in acquittal of an accused, could not constitute a factor for depriving a selected candidate from employment unless he was convicted and sentenced which would earn him a disqualification for holding the post."
In view of the above situation of law, the respondent State is directed to examine the case of the petitioner in the light of judgments referred to above and pass appropriate order.
Let this be done within a period of three months.
The period of three months would begin from the date the copy of order passed by this court is made available to the respondents by the petitioner.
If for any practical reasons it is not possible to take a decision, respondent-State would be at liberty to seek extension of time.
But in that eventuality they would have to explain each and every day's delay.
Disposed of accordingly.
Petition allowed.