THB Chalapathi, J - In this writ petition the petitioner is seeking a writ of certiorari to quash the order of his supersession for promotion to the rank of Colonel.
The challenge is made to the annual confidential report of the petitioner for the year 1990-91 on the ground that the said Confidential Report is the result of malice, bias and not a fair assessment of the petitioner's performance.
2.
The petitioner was commissioned into the Artillery Branch of the Army in 1975.
According to him, he earned promotion because of hard work and earning outstanding gradings and he has been promoted as Major on the basis of his performance and again he had been promoted as Lt.
Colonel on the basis of the selection.
Promotion from the rank of Major to the rank of Lt.
Colonel is always on the basis of selection.
The Annual Confidential Reports will have a great bearing for promotion to the rank of Colonel.
According to the petitioner, his Confidential reports to 1990 were good.
During 1990-91 the petitioner was serving under the Command Officer, Col. AK Samantaray and one Lt.
Colonel JP Singh was then serving as Second-in-Command in the Unit.
The petitioner and the said Lt.
Colonel JP Singh knew each other since both of them belonged to the same regiment and petitioner served under the Commanding Officer AK Samantaray only from June 1990 to July 1991.
On the day when Lt. Col. JP Singh left the unit, some anonymous complaint was received in the Unit against the Commanding Officer and that the Commanding Officer was under the impression that the Second-in-Command namely Col. JP Singh was having a hand in that complaint and therefore the Commanding Officer took his wrath on the petitioner since the petitioner was closely moving with Col. JP Singh.
According to the petitioner that was the reason for biased confidential report for the year 1990-91.
Therefore the petitioner in this writ petition is seeking to quash the annual confidential report for the year 1990-91 on the ground that it was actuated with malice, bias and not a fair assessment of the performance of the petitioner and to quash his supersession for promotion to the rank of Colonel and for consideration of the petitioner for promotion to the rank of Colonel.
This petition came up for hearing before a Division Bench of this Court consisting of Hon'ble Mr. Justice VK Bali and Hon'ble Mr. Justice NK Aggarwal.
By an order dated February 26, 1997 this writ petition was dismissed.
Speaking for the Bench Hon'ble Mr. Justice VK Bali while dismissing the writ petition observed as follows :-  "We have heard learned counsel for the parties and are of the view that the petitioner has not been able to substantiate his claim with regard to mala fide against Brig.
AK Samantaray.
We have also been taken through the records i.e. confidential reports of the petitioner for various years.
In the confidential report of the petitioner for the year 1990-91, star qualities of the petitioner have been assessed with seven marks.
With a view to find out as to whether the petitioner have always obtained maximum marks against his star qualities, we have seen his confidential records for the year 1987.
These star qualities have been assessed with seven and six marks.
In the confidential report of the petitioner for the year 1986-87, whereas his one star quality has been assessed with nine marks, other star qualities have been assessed with seven marks.
We have gone through other confidential reports of the petitioner also and it is not necessary to mention the marks obtained by him in his star qualities in all the reports.
Suffice it to say that on earlier occasions as well, petitioner was not given highest or very high marks against his star qualities.
It is, therefore, not proved that the petitioner had a very distinguished record of his star qualities.
From this alone, the sole argument that in the report for the year 1990-91 petitioner was reduced from his star qualities on account of bias entertained by Brig.
AK Samantaray, is falsified."
3.
Thereafter the petitioner filed an application to review the said order of the Division Bench of this Court in Review Application No. 280 of 1997.
The review applications was allowed on 21111997 by the same Bench.
While speaking for the Bench, Hon'ble Mr. Justice NK Aggarwal observed as follows :-  "The petitioner has now come with the plea that while dismissing his writ petition, this Court was influenced by the Appraisal Reports of the earlier years.
He has pointed out that in the earlier years "Closed System" of recording Annual Confidential Reports (ACRs) was adopted and, therefore he was not assessed fairly.
The Army adopted the "Closed System" of recording ACRs during the periods from 1970 to 1975 and from 1985 to 1990.
That experiment failed in achieving the objective and, therefore, it was decided to revert to "Open System" of reporting from March 1990 onwards.
It was noticed by the Army Headquarters vide Annexure `A' held that the "Closed System" of appraisal has been found to be defective.
The petitioner has argued that some Reporting Officers had unfairly used the "Closed System" of appraisal to cause harm to their subordinates.
The petitioner got very good ratings and marks in the "Star Qualities" under the "Open System" of appraisal.
Notices were issued on the petitioner's review application to the respondents and the Annual Confidential Reports of subsequent years were sent for.
We have looked into the Annual Confidential Reports of the period subsequent to 1991 and find that in subsequent years the petitioner was assessed with higher marks for his "Star Qualities".
As has been argued by the petitioner in person, we find it appropriate to consider afresh his plea that he was given better marks for his "Star Qualities" in all the subsequent years and in view of that, the annual assessment made for 1990-91, suffered from mala fides and bias."
4.
Thereafter the writ petition was admitted.
That is how the matter has come up before me.
As can be seen from the order of the review, the only thing remains to be considered now is whether the annual assessment made for the year 1990-91 suffered from mala fides and bias.
Hon'ble Mr. Justice VK Bali in the original order dismissing the writ petition categorically stated that the Bench was of the view that the petitioner has not been able to substantiate his claim with regard to mala fides against Brig.
AK Samantaray.
While concluding, his Lordship also observed, "from this alone, the sole argument that in the confidential report for the year 1990-91, the petitioner was reduced from his star qualities on account of bias entertained by Brig.
AK Samantaray, is falsified."
These observations were not referred to in the order of review, but at the same time the Bench held that it is appropriate to consider afresh the plea of the petitioner that he was given better marks for his "Star Qualities" in all the subsequent years and in view of that, the annual assessment made for the year 1990-91 suffered from mala fides.
5.
It is no doubt true as contended by the learned counsel for respondents that the annual confidential reports for the subsequent years will not go to show that bias on the part of the Reporting Officer.
The annual confidential reports will be based only on the performance of the petitioner during the year under consideration.
The confidential reports for the subsequent years will not have any bearing to decide the question whether the ACR for the year 1990-91 was actuated by bias or malice.
The Division Bench reviewed its order dated February 26, 1997 by the subsequent order which was authored by Hon'ble Mr. Justice NK Aggarwal.
6.
As already observed from a reading of the order of review the only question left for me to decide is whether the annual assessment of the performance of the petitioner made for the year 1990-91 suffered from any mala fides or bias.
7.
The petitioner's grievance is that Col. AK Samantaray was biased against him because of the his association with the then Lt. Col. JP Singh who was the Second-in-Command and because of strained relations of Col. AK Samantaray with Col. JP Singh, the then Second-in-Comman and since the petitioner was close to Col. JP Singh, the petitioner was made a scape-goat on receipt of the complaint against Col. AK Samantaray on the day when the then Lt. Col. JP Singh left the Unit.
Annexure P-2 dated July 12, 1991 shows that Col. AK Samantaray was not having cordial relations with Lt. Col. JP Singh.
It is not in dispute that he (Col. AK Samantaray) signed the petitioner's ACR for the year 1990-91.
The petitioner made a non-statutory complaint on 13th September, 1991 against ACR 1990-91.
While disposing of the said non-statutory complaint, the COAS approved the following recommendations of CAB :-  "The complainant has made a false statement that he was made to sign the ACR under pressure while on the contrary he himself tendered a letter of apology owning his various misconducts and misdemeanours during the reporting year.
Making false allegations against another officer and moral turpitude on his part need to be investigated and action taken accordingly.
AG may like to issue instructions."
Necessary action was directed to be taken.
On that Col. CKS Sabu gave a report which is annexed as Annexure P-6.
The said report reads as follows :-  "Ipso facto the reason given by the Officer for signing the letter of apology seems to be more plausible specially when Col. AK Samantaray also took an undertaking from Maj. SJ Singh that he would not represent against the ACR (para 3 of letter of apology Annexure 1 refers).
The officer (the petitioner) has been a victim of circumstances which were beyond his control as he was apparently penalised for his friendly association with the then Second-in-Command Lt. Col. (now Col.) JP Singh.
Since there is no conclusive proof of guilt on any of the issues raised in the letter of apology, the benefit of the doubt must be given to the officer on the ground that he signed the letter of apology under duress with the help (hope ?)
that his low rating in the ACR would be rectified, while fully knowing that he could disprove the charges endorsed in the letter of apology.
Any professional harm as outcome of this incident will unfairly jeopardise the career of a promising career solder.
Maj. SJ Singh has worked under me as a Bty.
Cdr for approx last two years.
I have found him to be upright, loyal, dependent and honest officer with a high sense of integrity.
He is unafraid to take hard decisions.
He is a diligent worker who upholds pride in his work and uniform and has maintained an excellent record of professional achievements."
8.
The petitioner was also given a show cause notice on December 22, 1993 which is filed as Annexure P-8.
Annexure P-10 is an order of the Ministry of Defence, Government of India dated 29th March, 1995.
In fact, this Annexure P-10 is under challenge.
9.
It is to be noted that the statutory complaint who disposed of in August 1992 vide Annexure P-12, wherein it has been stated as follows :-  "The non-statutory complaint dated 24th July, 1991 submitted by Col. JP Singh (IC-24731) Arty.
against his ACR for the year 1990-91, comments of the reporting officers and other points at issue, have been examined in their entirety with a view to ensure that ends of natural justice are not denied to the complainant.
The details alongwith the record of service of the Officer were placed before the Chief of Army Staff.
After a careful and sympathetic consideration of all aspects, as warranted by the merits of the case and viewing it against the background of the overall performance profile of the officer the Chief of Army Staff has directed setting aside of ACR 1990-91, on grounds of inconsistency and subjectivity.
Accordingly, ACR for the year 1990-91 has been set aside."
10.
Since the petitioner was working under Col. AK Samantaray, I do not think that any reliance can be placed on Annexures S-1 to S-4.
The report dated 161993 of Col. CKS Sabu who was Commanding Officer during the years 1990-93 is in favour of the petitioner.
It clearly shows that the petitioner was a victim of the circumstances which were beyond his control.
It also shows that the petitioner was apparently penalised for his friendly association with the then Second-in-Command namely Lt. Col. JP Singh (now Colonel).
I do not find any ground to deviate from this finding.
Further Brig.
MS Sandhu has observed on 23rd June, 1993 vide Annexure P-7 as follows :-  "It comes out quite clearly that Maj. SJ Singh was made to sign the ACR under pressure and the letter of apology tendered by the officer owning his misconduct misdemeanours and moral turptitude just prior to signing his ACR was an outcome of a trade for a better rating in his ACR while fully knowing that the charges were false."
Further the Chief of Army Staff directed even in August, 1992 setting aside the ACR of the petitioner for the year 1990-91 on the ground of inconsistency and subjectivity.
This material has not been taken into consideration by the Ministry of Defence while passing the orders under Annexure P-10 on the statutory complaint dated 2361993 (vide Annexure P-10 dated 2931995).
Thus I am of the opinion that the ACR of the petitioner for the year 1990-91 was not based on objective assessment of his performance.
11.
I, therefore, set aside the ACR of the petitioner for the year 1990-91 and direct the authorities to re-assess the performance of the petitioner for the year 1990-91 based on record and consider his case for further promotion on the basis of the fresh assessment for the year 1990-91 and the ACRs recorded for the subsequent years with regard to his performance.
The writ petition is accordingly disposed of.
Petition allowed.