RL Anand, J. (Oral) - Himmat Singh son of Waryam Singh, resident of village Amirpur Jattan, Post Office Tanda Ramsahai, Tehsil Dasuya, District Hoshiarpur has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India against the State of Punjab, Director, Health & Family Welfare, Punjab, Civil Surgeon, Hoshiarpur and Senior Medical Officer, Primary Health Centre, Budhawar for the issuance of a writ, order or direction, specially writ of certiorari quashing the termination order dated 441997, Annexure P9, passed by respondent No. 2.
The petitioner has further prayed that a writ of mandamous be issued to the respondents to re-instate him in service along with all consequential benefits.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he is an ex-serviceman and served the Indian Army w.e.f.
2.1.1971 till he attained the superannuation on 121995.
When he joined the Army, he was having the qualification of matriculate.
During the course of his military servie he underwent a course of three years which is known as `General Nursing Class-I Examination' and thereafter the Army Medical Corps issued a certificate of technical proficiency `General Nursing' to him, which is Annexure P2.
This certificate has the equal value to `male nurse of civil'.
The petitioner at the time of his retirement was also issued graduation certificate which qualify him for reserved group `C' post in which the prescribed qualification is graduate.
According to the petitioner, as per the certificate he was eligible for appointment to the post of Pharmacist which was considered equivalent to the post of Nursing Assistant for which he was already having nursing dipoma.
Moreover, directory of equation of service trades with civil trades issued by the Government of India shows that the diploma obtained by the petitioner is equivalent to general nursing etc.  3.
The Subordinate Services Selection Board, Punjab issued an advertisment inviting applications for the posts of Male Multipurpose Workers against 401 vacancies.
Out of these, 100 posts were reserved for Scheduled Castes, 20 for Backward Castes, 56 for Ex-Servicemen and 225 posts were meant for general category in the pay scale of Rs. 950-1800 and the qualification prescribed for the posts of Multipurpose Workers (Male) was Matric with Science Diploma in MPW and knowledge of Punjabi language upto Matric standard.
Since the petitioner fulfilled the requisite qualifications, he applied for the post.
After the scrutiny of his application, he was called for the interview.
On successfully qualifying the interview, the Secretary of the Board recommended his name to respondent No. 2 for issuance of appointment letter and in pursuance of the said recommendation, the petitioner was issued the appointment letter by respondent No. 2.
The appointment was subject to the outcome of the decision of the writ petition referred to in the appointment letter.
The writ was partly allowed by the Hon'ble High Court and directions were given to the department to examine the eligibility of all the appointees in the light of the said order and if it is found that other candidates were also ineligible to be considered for selection, then the services of such persons should be terminated after giving action oriented notice and opportunity of hearing.
The case set up by the petitioner is that his services could not be terminated or discharged as he was fulfilling the qualification required for the post.
Show cause notice was given to the petitioner on 1431998 before passing the impugned order.
He gave reply to the show cause notice on 2031997.
The reply of the petitioner was wrongly ignored by the respondents, who passed the termination order dated 441997, Annexure P9.
The petitioner approached the respondents-authorities to withdraw this order, but to no effect.
Hence, the present writ petition with the above prayer.
4.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
A joint written statement was filed on behalf of the respondents and the stand taken up by the respondents is that the Diploma of General Nursing is considered for appointments of Staff Nurse including male staff nurse and not for the appointment of Multipurpose Health Worker (Male).
In the advertisement the qualification of Multipurpose Health Worker (Male) was entirely different than the qualification which the petitioner posssses.
Moreover, the petition is liable to be dismissed for non-joinder of necessary and proper parties in the writ petition.
On merits, the stand of the respondents is that the requisite qualification for the post was diploma in Multipurpose Health Worker (Male) which should be recognised by the Punjab Government of any institution.
But to the petitioner was having diploma showing that he had completed three years General Nursing Course from Army Medical Corps, which is not equivalent to the qualification required by the Board.
The appointment letter which was issued to the petitioner was subject to decision of the writ petitions which were partly allowed and the directions were issued to the respondents to examine the case of other appointees and if those appointees are not eligible for the post, their appointment should also be quashed after giving notices.
The appointment of the petitioner was subject to the outcome of the decision of the writ petitions.
The case of the petitioner was considered by the three- member committee and he was found to be ineligible for the appointment of Multipurpose Health Worker and hence the impugned order was passed on 441997.
5.
A rejoined was filed by the petitioner in which he reiterated his allegations made in the petition by denying those of the written statement.
6.
The petitioner, in support of his case, has placed on record certain documents and I will make a mention of the relevant documents in the subsequent portion of this judgment.
7.
I have heard Mr. KS Dadwal, Advocate, on behalf of the petitioner, Mr. JS Brar, Deputy Advocate General, on behalf of the respondents and with their assistance have gone through the records of this case.
8.
The only point which survives for determination in this case is whether the petitioner was fulfilling the requisite qualification for the post of Multipurpose Health Worker (Male) or not.
Annexure P6 is the advertisement given by the Subordinate Services Selection Board.
Against Sr. No. 15 it was advertised that there were 401 posts of Multipurpose Worker (Male).
The qualifications which were laid down by the employer were : (i) Matric Science Subject; (ii) MPW Diploma (Male) duly recognised by the Punjab Govt. of any Institute; and (iii) Punjabi language knowledge upto Matric.
In these circumstances, it has to be seen whether the petitioner had passed Matric in Science subject and whether he was holding Multipurpose Worker Diploma duly recognised by the Punjab Government or its equivalent.
Annexure P2 is the certificate of technical proficiency issued by the military authorities and according to this certificate it was certified that the petitioner had passed General Nursing Class I Examination.
It was also certified that this examination is equal to Male Nurse of Civil.
Thus there is a clear deviation from the qualification laid down in Annexure P6.
The qualification which the petitioner was possessing was not in accordance with the advertisement Annexure P6.
The next document which can be discussed is the letter Annexure P11 dated 1091997 issued by the Deputy Director, Sainik to the Chairman, Subordinate Services Selection Board, Punjab, Chandigarh in which it was stated with reference to one Ex-Hav.
Gurwant Singh, who was working as Nursing Assistant, that his qualifications were compared in the light of Directory of Equation of Service Trades with Civil Trades and it was certified that Ex-Hav.
Gurwant Singh fulfills the qualifications for the post of Multipurpose Health Worker (Male).
The counsel for the petitioner wants to say that the petitioner was holding the same type of qualifications which were being held by Ex-Hav, Gurwant Singh.
Since it has been certified by Deputy Director, Sainik Welfare (M) that Ex-Hav.
Gurwant Singh (Nursing Assistant) had the requisite qualifications required for the post of Multipurpose Health Worker (Male), therefore, an inference can also be drawn in favour of the petitioner that he was fulfilling the requisite qualifications.
I do not subscribe to the submission raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
It is settled by this time that it is within the competency of the employer to lay down the qualifications for the post required to be fulfilled by a candidate.
The Courts cannot strike down such qualifications unless those qualifications are arbitrary in nature.
Firstly, it is not clear what type of qualification Ex-Hav.
Gurwant Singh was possessing which were held equivalent to the qualifications as required in the advertisement Annexure P6.
But so far as the petitioner is concerned, he is relying upon Annexure P2, through which it is clear that the petitioner simply passed General Nursing Class-I Examination and the value of that examination is equal to the value of Male Nurse of Civil.
Thus it is concluded from the above discussion that the petitioner was not holding the equivalent qualifications as were required for the post.
9.
Against these selections some writes were instituted in the High Court bearing Nos. 3687 of 1996 Kabul Singh & others v. State of Punjab, 4589 of 1996 Gurdev Singh & others v. State of Punjab and 6248 of 1996 Pawan Kumar v. State of Punjab.
Those writs were disposed of on merits by the Hon'ble Division bench vide judgement dated 8101996 and the Hon'ble Division Bench was pleased to hold, by taking note of the judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme Court, that illegal appointments result in public injury.
Therefore, directions were given to the respondents to examine the eligibility of other persons, who have been appointed on the posts of Multipurpose Workers (Male) on the basis of the impugned selection and revoke the appointments of those who are found ineligible in the light of the observations made by the Division Bench in the judgment.
The Hon'ble Division Bench also held that before terminating the services of ineligible persons action-oriented notice and opportunity of hearing should be given to them and this exercise should be completed by the department within six months.
In compliance with these directions, the petitioner was served with a notice and he also gave the reply.
The impugned order Annexure P9 clearly spells out that the show cause notice dated 1431997 was given to the petitioner and he also filed a reply to that.
The authorities considered the reply to the show cause notice and ultimately it was found that the petitioner did not fulfil the prescribed qualifications for the said post as per the judgment dated 8101996 rendered by the Hon'ble Division Bench.
In this view of the matter, the services of the petitioner were dispensed with/terminated vide this letter.
The principles of natural justice in this case have already been complied with.
In this view of the matter, I do not see any merit in this writ petition.
The same is hereby dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petitin dismissed.