Harjit Singh Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was enrolled in the Army on 11th March, 1987 after having been found fully fit by a competent medical board.
He was discharged from Army service by the invalidating medical board with 30% disability on 7101993.
The petitioner thereafter raised a claim to the grant of disability pension but the same was declined and as per the respondents, the order of rejection was also conveyed to the petitioner.
The petitioner thereafter filed an appeal against the said order but as no result was forthcoming, served a legal notice on the respondents on 561996, but as this also met with no response, the petitioner has come to this court by way of the present writ petition.
2.
It is the conceded position that during the pendency of the writ petition, the residents (respondents ?)
have rejected the petitioner's appeal vide Annexure R-1 dated 4th September, 1996.
In the reply filed by the respondents in response to the notice of motion in the writ petition, it has been pointed out that as the rejection order by the competent authority had not been impugned, the writ petition was mis-conceived.
It has also been pleaded that the petitioner had been invalidated out of army service on the advice of a competent medical board as he was suffering from personality disorder (unspecified) with 30% disability.
It has also been pleaded that the petitioner's claim to disability pension had been rejected by the Chief Controller of Defence Accounts (Pension) Allahabad [for short the CCDA(P)] vide its order dated 10111994, as the petitioner's disability was of a constitutional nature and could not be attributable to military service.
The respondents have also annexed Annexure R-1 aforesaid with the reply and the stand taken in the written statement finds reiteration therein.
3.
Mr. JS Bhatti, the learned counsel for the petitioner, has argued that at the time of the petitioner's enrolment into service in March 1987, he had been found fully fit by a competent medical board and that in the light of the provisions of Rule 14(b) of the Entitlement Rules for Casualty Pensionary Awards, 1982 (hereinafter called `the Rules') when read with Regulation 173 of the Pension Regulations for the Army, 1961, it was apparent that the petitioner's disability must be held attributable to military service.
He has also urged that personality disorder (unspecified) was a species of mental disease and, as such, it has to be treated as having been caused by stress and strain of service as per Annexure-III to the Rules.
He has also urged that the aforesaid argument finds support from the Division Bench decision of this Court in Union of India v. Shyam Lal Malhotra, 1995(2) R.S.J.
493.
4.
Mr. Sharma, the learned counsel for the Union of India has, however, placed reliance on the fact that personality disorder was not one of the diseases mentioned in Annexure-III to the Rules and, as such it could not be held as being attributable to military service.
He has also urged that as the order of the competent authority had not been impugned, the writ petition was not maintainable.
5.
The learned counsel for the parties have been heard.
I am of the opinion that the writ petition deserves to succeed.
In the case of Sham Lal Malhotra (supra), it has been held that a combined reading of Regulation 173 and Rule 7(b) (now re-numbered as Rule 14(b)) postulated that the cause of disability which had led to the individual's discharge from service would be deemed to have arisen in service if no note of it was made at the time of entry in service that he was suffering from such disability or unless a note was recorded at a subsequent date that the disease in question was such as could not have been detected by medical examination before he had joined the service.
It is the admitted case that at the time of petitioner's entry into service or subsequent thereto, no note had been recorded in the manner suggested by Rule 14(b).
A presumption therefore arises that the petitioner had suffered the disease on account of his military service.
6.
It is true, as has been contended by Mr. Sharma, that personality disorder is not one of the diseases mentioned in Annexure-III.
In sub-heading (b) the diseases known as "Psychosis" and "psychoneurosis" affected by stress and strain of military service do find mention.
While construing a similar argument the Division Bench of Himachal Pradesh High Court in Bhag Singh v. Union of India, 1996(4) R.S.J.
55 held as under :  "There is an Annexure with the Rules in Appendix II to Regulation 173 to Pension Regulations for the Army Part-I, 1961, which deals with classification of various diseases which are to be effected by climatic conditions, affected by stress and strain, affected by dietary compulsions, training, marching etc. and normally affected by the service.
In the list of diseases affected by stress and strain of military service, the disease known as "psychosis" and "psychoneurosis" have been included.
Needless to say, these diseases relate to mental disorder of an individual.
Schizophrenia, with which the petitioner was suffering from and which disease he developed during his military service, can definitely be said to be adversely affected by the stress and strain of the military service."
This judgment was followed by this Court in Harjit Singh v. Union of India, 1998(4) SCT 88.
It must, therefore, be held that though personality disorder may be constitutional disease like "Schizophrenia" yet that factor by itself would not defeat a claim for the grant of disability pension.
Moreover, in another Division Bench of this Court in Union of India and others v. Bodan Lal Yadav, 1994(1) RSJ 381 : 1994(1) S.C.T.
369 it has been held that personality disorder was a disease which could entitle a servicemen to lay a claim to disability pension.
Mr. Sharma's argument with regard to the maintainability of the writ petition must also be rejected for the reason that the order Annexure R-1 supersedes the order of the competent authority.
Moreover, a mere technicality cannot defeat a writ petition seeking the grant of disability pension.
7.
This petition is accordingly allowed, the order Annexure R-1 is quashed and a direction is issued that the petitioner be granted disability pension taking his disability at 30% w.e.f.
the date of his discharge from the Army.
It is further directed that the petitioner would be paid the arrears within a period of four months from the date that a certified copy of this order is supplied to the respondents.
No costs.
Dasti Order.
Petition allowed.