THB Chalapathi, J - The petitioner invoking the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India approached this Court for issuance of a writ of certiorari to quash the order terminating his services as Orderly of the Court of Sub-Judge, Ist Class, Palwal.
2.
The petitioner was appointed on 1.8.1979 as a Waterman by the District & Sessions Judge, Gurgaon.
On creation of Sessions Division of Faridabad he was taken as a Peon in the Faridabad transferred Sessions Division.
According to the petitioner he was a regular employee.
Without granting any opportunity to the petitioner, his services were terminated on 28.8.1986 by the District & Sessions Judge, Faridabad vide Annexure P-1.
The appeal by the petitioner to this Court was also rejected on 1021987 vide Annexure P-3.
Therefore, the petitioner filed the present writ petition challenging the order of his termination.
3.
In the Counter filed by the District Judge it has been averred that the petitioner was not a regular employee and he was earlier terminated on 1231984 and thereafter he was reinstated in service.
Thereafter a complaint was received from the Sub Judge, Ist Class, Palwal and the petitioner was called upon to explain his conduct on the said complaint, but the petitioner did not furnish any explanation.
Then the services of the petitioner were terminated in accordance with the terms and conditions of his appointment.
4.
Annexure R-1 shows that the petitioner was appointed on ad hoc basis for a period of two months in the leave vacancy.
5.
I have perused the record which shows that the petitioner was never appointed as a permanent employee at any time.
His services were purely temporary.
The record shows that a notice was given to him to explain why the action should not be taken on the basis of the report of the Sub Judge, Ist Class, Palwal against his conduct.
But the petitioner never cared to submit his explanation.
The petitioner also remained absent from duty in the year 1983.
After going through the service record of the petitioner, I am of the opinion that the petitioner was only a temporary employee and he was not made permanent.
Therefore, the termination of the petitioner cannot be said to be illegal or violative of the principles of natural justice.
I do not find any ground to quash the impugned order of termination.
6.
The writ petition, therefore, fails and is, accordingly, dismissed.
Petition dismissed.