Syed Bashir-ud-din, J - The writ petitioner has prayed for writ in the nature of certiorari for quashing order A/Dadsar/87 dated 27.7.1987 wherein the petitioner has been asked to hand over charge of ED BPO Dadsar to Kishan Pandit whose appointment as BPN Dadsar has been approved (annexure C) and further for regularisation of petitioner's services.
The petitioner, permanent resident of State of J&K was appointed as ED Packer on ad hoc basis by respondent No. 2 vide his order dt. 29981 (annexure A).
The petitioner worked as such ED Packer from his appointment in Sept 1981 till 17th of Nov 1986 against post of ED Packer SPO at Dadsara.
On the death of BPM Dadsara, the petitioner was given the charge of the office of BPM Dadsar and performed duties as such (annexure B).
The ED agents which term includes the petitioner, are governed by the Post and Telegraphs Extra-departmental Agents (conduct and service) Rules 1964 (hereinafter for short as rules 1964).
One of the condition of appointment as ED BPM at the particular post office, is that the incumbent has to be permanent resident of village where the Branch Post office is located.
The condition of residence in post village where ED BPM is located, is provided by the rules and cannot be dispensed with.
Subject to availability of vacancy of ED BPM or SPM preference is to be given to ED agent rather than to an outsider.
The alleged appointment of the petitioner as ED BPM is not violative of rules.
Despite appointment and functioning as ED BPM Dadsar, the petitioner's service were not regularised.
Instead by impugned order annexure C Shri Kishan Pandit has been posted as ED BDM Dadsar and his services as such stand terminated.
The services of ad hoc appointees like petitioner who continued on the post for number of years cannot be terminated in an arbitrary manner and more so when this action is actuated by malice.
The benefit of appointment cannot be withdrawn from an employee unilaterally.
2.
After the case was admitted to hearing, the counsel for the respondents opted for adoption of the objections as reply.
Petitioner's appointment on ad hoc basis as ED packer at Dadsara on 29981 is admitted.
He is averred to have worked as such ED agent upto 20th of April 1985 when on account of down grading of ED SPO to ED BPO at Dadsara, the post of ED packer held by the petitioner got abolished and the petitioner was retrenched, thereby the ad hoc appointment as ED packer of petitioner came to an end on 20485, whereafter despite being put on the waiting list of retrenched ED Agents, he could not be absorbed against any available vacancy during operative period of the said list.
Once the petitioner could not be absorbed during operative period of one year, the list lost its life and validity and consequently the petitioner ceased to have any claim for his absorption as ED agent.
3.
Notwithstanding all this the petitioner was given the charge as ED BPM Dadsar on 17.11.1986 only as a provisional arrangement after the ED BPM Sh. Shamlal Pandit died during service.
He continued to hold the charge and functioned as ED BPM till July 1987 when one Sh. Jaikrishan Pandit S/o Shamlal Pandit was appointed as EDBPM Dadsar on compassionate grounds and the requirement of local residence was also relaxed in his case.
The provisional arrangement of giving ED BPM post in the charge of the petitioner stood terminated.
Despite directions of high -ups in the department as petitioner failed to hand over the charge of office, record and articles to the new- appointee, this said Jaikrishan under orders operated from a new place and used new set of stamps prepared by the department.
The respondent No. 4 is functioning as ED BPM Dadsar thereafter.
The provisional arrangement and engagement of petitioner as ED BPM Dadsar on the death of Shamlal Pandit who held the post of ED SPO Dadsar who ordered by respondent No. 2, to be approved by respondent No. 1.
The provisional arrangement did not confer any right on the petitioner.
Respondent No. 4 has in terms braced the very ground as culled above to defend his appointment a ED BPM at Dadsar Tral.
4.
The petitioner's claim that he continued functioning as ED packer at Dadsara till 17.11.1986 is disputed.
Instead the said ad hoc appointment of the petitioner is stated to have come to and end on 20.4.1985 with down gradation of ED SPO to that of ED BPO at Dadsara.
The appointment of petitioner ordered by respondent No. 2 Inspector Post Office is without competence as he had no powers to order such an appointment.
Respondent No. 4's appointment in place of death of his father Shamlal Pandit as ED BPM Dadsar on compassionate grounds is covered by law.
He has assumed charge and is functioning as such BPM.
The impugned order has been passed in accordance with law and therefore, cannot be quashed.
5.
Neither respondent No. 4 nor his counsel has appeared to defend the case, after March 1988.
Mr. SA Naik Addl.
Standing Counsel of Union of India concedes that respondent No. 4 is a migrant and has left the valley for last so many years.
6.
At the outset, standing counsel for the respondents 1 to 3, submits that the matter and issue raised in this petition falls within writ jurisdiction of this court.
He is joined by counsel for the petitioner to submit that the matter may be heard and decided.
7.
Heard, perused the record and considered the matter.
8.
Much of the material facts in this case are not in dispute.
The main question raised for adjudication before this court is the legality or otherwise of the appointment of respondent No. 4, as ED BPM Dadsar in July 1987.
9.
The extra-departmental agent system is invoked in the department of Posts and Telegraphs for long.
The services of various persons and for the most part in rural areas, are availed to run the postal service through this EDA System.
In 1964 rules were framed to regulate the appointments, promotions, payment of allowances and pensions, conduct and discipline, provision of enquiries for indiscipline and misconduct etc. of ED-Agents.
These rules are called the Post and Telegraph Extra-Departmental Conduct and Service Rules.
These Rules of 1964 also specify the categories of posts and the incumbents of such posts as extra-departmental agents.
In this case we are in main concerned with the method of recruitment on compassionate appointment in case of death providing for by these rules.
10.
In terms of Rule 2 of the rules ED packer, ED SPM and ED BPM are defined as EXTRA-DEPARTMENTAL AGENT.
The qualification for ED SPM and ED-BPM is matriculate and for other categories of ED's, it is 8th standard.
Besides other conditions provided for the occupants of ED SPM/ED BPM it is a requirement that the person appointed to either of these posts must be a permanent resident of village where the post office is located.
The reason being to enable him to attend to the post office work efficiently and efficaciously having regard to the nature of the work at the post office.
In the process, the official work at the post office need not be adjusted in a manner to suit the timings, convenience or main avocations of ED Agents.
11.
While providing for compassionate appointment to dependents in case of death in respect of ED posts, certain conditions have been laid which have to be fulfilled and in main it is provided that even in such a case, conditions applicable to regular employees of Postal Department have to be met and offering of employment to the dependent of an ED Agent who has died in service leaving behind the family in indigent circumstances has to be given only in very hard and exceptional cases.
In terms of instructions supplied on the subject, it is provided that all such cases should be taken at the earliest and finalised expeditiously.
In no circumstances, it should be left to dependents to came up with the request for compassionate appointment belatedly or at the time of their choosing.
In terms of the instructions and clarification issued by Postal Department of the Union of India, it has been specifically provided that widow/widowers as dependent of deceased ED Agents can be given relaxation subject to conditions provided thereto in matter of qualification, but the rules nowhere provided that the local residence qualification required for appointment to the post of ED BPM/ED SPM can be relaxed, and in any case no such rule has been brought to the notice of this court.
In these circumstances, the appointment of respondent No. 4 Jaikrishan Pandit not resident of Dadasra, where the post of ED BPM was available as ED BPM Dadsara, is in violation of rules and instructions issued thereunder.
12.
Petitioner was appointed as ED Pakcer on ad hoc basis in SPO Dadsara on 29981 and was given charge of ED BPM at Dadsara on 17.11.1986.
Though, the certificate indicating assumption of charge by petitioner on the said date is evidenced by annexure B, no separate order of appointment as ED BPM of petitioner is on record, But all the same, the Inspector Post Office Srinagar respondent No. 2 in his note has mentioned at item No. 3 that the petitioner was engaged provisionally BPM at Dadsara till further orders subject to approval or Sr. Supdt.
Post office respondent No. 1 and directed post master Tral to give necessary training to the petitioner (annexure 1).
Even in reply, it is not refuted that the appointment of petitioner as ED SPO Dadsara was ordered on 17.11.86 by the Inspector.
13.
In terms of the rules of 1964, the Inspector of Post Offices has been authorised to make appointment in anticipation and formal approval of the Supdt.
of Post offices, where there is no contest for the post of ED BPM and in such a case the formal orders to be issued by the competent appointing authority, the Divisional Supdt.
are expected in routine and the appointing authority is in terms of the rules obliged to issue such orders.
It is only in case where several claimants lay claim to the post of ED BPM, the Inspector of Post Office is required to obtain prior approval of the Divisional Supdt.
The rules also provide that the provisional appointment to ED Posts can be made.
In particular the instructions and rules provide that where an ED Agent dies in service and immediate regular appointment is not possible a provisional appointment can be made for a specified period and in which case the appointment order has to be in the prescribed form (annexure A to the rules contained by Chapter providing for method and mode of recruitment to EDA posts.)
14.
In the case at hand, admittedly the appointment has been made by the Inspector respondent No. 2.
The appointment of petitioner to said EDA Post is admittedly provisional and made by the Inspector in terms of rules, notwithstanding that the period for which provisional appointment is to hold good has not been specified and the appointment is not on the prescribed form.
15.
At the time when the Inspector made appointment only the petitioner was known claimant for the ED Post and no rival claimant had emerged till then.
It was only after the appointment of the petitioner was ordered that the respondent No. 4 raised claim for appointment as dependent of the deceased ED BPM Dadsara.
This is even admitted by the respondents in reply.
In terms of the Rules, the petitioner had the eligibility to seek appointment to the post of EDA at the relevant time including post Village residential qualification.
16.
The case of the respondents that the service of petitioner as ED packer in Branch Post Office Tral were terminated on down grading of the post office as ED SPO at Dadsara and therefore, the petitioner cannot claim that he continued as ED packer till he was given charge of ED BPM Dadsara, is not supported by required document and material.
Even if, it is so, then the question arises whether after abolishing of the post as ED packer, petitioner has remedy in law.
The rules of 1964 as on the relevant date, provide that where an ED Agent appointed provisionally and subsequent discharged from services due to Administrative reasons has put in not less than three years service, the efforts should be made to give alternate employment to such ED agent.
For the purpose their names should be included in the waiting list of ED Agents, discharged from services prescribed thereto.
The instructions issued by Director General of Postal Services also provide same guide-lines and are supplemental to the rules.
Even the appointing authority are under legal obligation to ensure that the displaced ED agents are adjusted on alternative posts subject to applicable rules and guide-lines.
In terms of instructions issued by high -ups including the Director General P&T, the appointment to ED BPM and ED SPM posts has to be strictly in accordance with the rules.
The vacancies have to be advertised in order to tap better talent.
The eligibility criteria including the residence of post village have to be strictly complied with.
There is nothing on record to reveal that the Rules of 1964 and compassionate appointment Rules of the Union Govt. as applicable to the Postal Department have been complied with, while ordering appointment of Respondent No. 4.
The petitioner's case does not seem to have been considered in proper perspective and in the spirit and terms of the rules.
The provisional appointment of petitioner has been ordered by the authority competent to order such appointments.
17.
The respondents have not pleaded or advocated their case, that while ordering appointment of respondent No. 4, the claim and case of petitioner was also considered within the ambit of rules and that the ED BPM post at Dadsar was filled strictly in accordance with rules.
18.
While throwing away the petitioner from the post of ED-Agent, on which post(s) he worked for number of years, it is minimum requirement of law that he should have been given opportunity to place his case/view point before the authorities and ought to have been heard in the matter.
Even this minimal requirement has not been complied with in this case.
19.
It is conceded by counsel for respondents 1 to 3 that respondent No. 4 Jaikrishan Pandit is a migrant and has left the valley for last over 8 years and is no more working as ED BPM at Dadsar.
20.
Having thus, considered the mater in totality, the impugned appointment order is quashed and set aside and the petitioner's case shall be considered by competent Authority including respondent No. 1 and 2 of Union of India respondent No. 3, for such treatment and disposal as may be required by and in terms of applicable statutory rules and regulations on the subject.
Petition disposed of.