GS Singhvi, J - This petition has been filed for quashing the memo dated 2681998 issued by the Director of Public Instructions (S), Punjab rejecting the petitioner's claim for appointment as Vocational Master (Computer Science).
2.
A careful reading of the averments made in the writ petition shows that the petitioner was one of the candidates who was selected for appointment as Vocational Master (Computer Science) from amongst those who had applied in pursuance of the advertisement Annexure P-1 dated 1981992 issued by the Chairman, Departmental Selection Committee.
On 1471994, the respondent No. 2 appointed him as Vocational Master (Computer Science) in the pay scale of Rs. 1800-3200.
However, his services were terminated vide order dated 30121994, which was issued in compliance of the directions given by the High Court in CWP No. 5985 of 1994, Yashwinder Singh Rana and others v. State of Punjab and others, decided on 2891994 : 1995(2) SCT 38 (P&H).
Simultaneously, he was given fresh appointment for 89 days by way of stop gap arrangement which continued till November, 1997, when he was relieved in view of the instructions issued by the respondent No. 2 vide memo No. 2/151-97- Estt.-2(4) dated 13111997.
3.
After all this had happened, the petitioner instituted Civil Writ Petition No. 9998 of 1998, which was disposed of by this Court on July 3, 1998.
The extract of that order is reproduced below :-  "After having heard Shri Kakkar at some length, we are of the opinion that without disclosing to the Court the number of persons who were selected and appointed as Vocational Masters (Computer Science) in pursuance of the advertisement dated 1981992 and without showing to the Court that advertised posts of Vocational Masters (Computer Science) are still vacant, the petitioner cannot get relief in the form of mandamus directing the respondents to allow him to continue in service.
Faced with this the learned counsel for the petitioner requested that a direction may kindly be issued to the Departmental Selection Committee and the official respondents to disclose the names and details of the candidates selected for appointment as Vocational Masters (Computer Science) and the details of the persons who are still continuing on those posts.
Having considered the request of the learned counsel, we dispose of the writ petition with the observation that within three weeks of the submission of an application by the petitioner, respondent No. 2/Chairman, Departmental Selection Committee shall make available to the petitioner details of the total number of persons selected for appointment as Vocational Masters (Computer Science) and also disclose to him the number of persons who are still holding such posts.
Respondent No. 2 is also directed to disclose the merit position of the petitioner besides other selected candidates.
Sd/- GS Singhvi, Judge, July 3, 1998, Sd/- B Rai, Judge."
4.
In the purported compliance of the direction given by the Court, the respondent No. 2 issued the impugned memo declining the petitioner's request for regular appointment on the post of Vocational Master (Computer Science).
5.
Shri Chopra challenged the legality of the impugned decision by arguing that two of the persons who were selected and placed above the petitioner in the merit list did not join duty and, therefore, the petitioner should have been adjusted against the post remaining vacant due to non-joining of the selected candidates.
6.
We have thoughtfully considered the submission of Shri Chopra but are unable to agree with him that a writ be issued to quash the memo.
annexure P-7 and to direct the respondent No. 2 to appoint the petitioner.
A bare reading of the impugned communication shows that while refusing to entertain the petitioner's claim, the respondent No. 2 gave liberty to him to contact the Deputy Director (Vocational) working in his office to seek any clarification.
This necessarily means that the petitioner is entitled to make representation to the respondents pointing out that the posts against which selected candidates were appointed remained unfilled due to non-joining of two of such candidates.
He can also produce copy of the affidavit Annexure P-3 to support this statement.
The respondents can make proper investigation/enquiry and then decide whether or not the petitioner should be given appointment against the unfilled posts.
Therefore, instead of filing the petition, the petitioner should have availed the departmental remedy available to him.
7.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is dismissed.
However, we give liberty to the petitioner to make representation to the respondent No. 2 and the Deputy Director (Vocational) for appointment against one of the unfilled posts of Vocational Masters (Computer Science) and we hope that such representation will be considered and decided expeditiously.
Petition dismissed.