HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner joined service as a Constable in the Punjab Police on 17th August, 1960.
He was allocated to the State of Haryana in 1968 on its creation in 1966 and was ultimately promoted as Head Constable on 23rd March, 1971 and confirmed in that post on 20th February, 1975.
He was thereafter promoted as officiating Assistant Sub-Inspector on 11th September, 1976 and was confirmed as such on 10th March, 1981.
He was promoted as Sub Inspector on 3rd June, 1983 and confirmed in that post on 1st August, 1985.
The petitioner was given a notice of retirement dated 17th Uly, 1996 by the Superintendent of Police, Hissar.
This notice/order was challenged by the petitioner by way of CWP No. 17016 of 1996 and a Division Bench of this Court in its order dated 341997 quashed the order on the ground that the notice of compulsory retirement was short of three months and was, as such, invalid.
Liberty was however left with the respondents to pass a fresh order in accordance with the rules.
As a consequence of the High Court order, the order dated 17th July, 1996 was withdrawn and a fresh notice for compulsory retirement Annexure P-2 dated 8th August, 1997 was made by the Superintendent of Police, Hissar.
This notice/order has been impugned in the present writ petition, inter alia on the ground that as the appointing authority of the petitioner was the Deputy Inspector General of the range, the order Annexure P-2 passed by the Senior Superintendent of Police, could not be sustained and deserved to be quashed on this ground alone.
Reliance has been placed by the petitioner on Rules 3.26 Volume-I, Part-I of the Punjab Civil Service Rules, (hereinafter called the `Rules') and on Rules 121, 139 and 1310 of the Punjab Police Rules in support of this plea.
2.
On notice of motion, a reply has been put in on behalf of the respondents and it has been pointed out that the fresh order of compulsory retirement had been made following the liberty given by this Court to do so.
It has also been pointed out that the petitioner's service record for the last ten years or so did not warrant his continuance in government service.
It has also been pleaded that as the petitioner had been promoted as an Assistant Sub Inspector and thereafter as a Sub Inspector by the Superintendent of Police of the district, the order Annexure P-2 having been made by the same officer was fully justified in law.
3.
Mr. Laler, the learned counsel for the petitioner has raised two arguments before me.
He has first argued that from a bare reading of rules 121, 139, 1310 of the Police Rules, the appointment by promotion to the rank of Assistant Sub Inspector/Sub Inspector had to be made by the Deputy Inspector General of the range and in that eventuality, the DIG being the statutory authority to make the appointment was the only officer who could have passed the order of compulsory retirement.
In the alternative Mr. Laler has argued that, as a matter of fact, a Division Bench of this Court in CWP No. 9617 of 1994 had held that the power to order compulsory retirement under Rule 918(2) of the Police Rules vested with the Director General of Police alone and, as such, the order was bad for this reason as well.
4.
As against this Mr. Ajay Jain, the learned State councel has argued that as the petitioner had been promoted to the rank of Assistant Sub Inspector and thereafter to the rank of Sub Inspector by the Superintendent of Police of the district concerned, the order of compulsory retirement could have been made by an officer of identical rank as he would be the appointing authority to all intents and purposes.
5.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the relevant provisions.
Rule 121 of the Police Rules undoubtedly provides that the appointing authority for Sub Inspectors and Assistant Sub Inspectors is the Superintendent of Police or the Deputy Superintendent.
(Administrative).
Police Rules 139 and 1310 however specifically provide that the substantive promotion to the rank of Assistant Sub Inspector and Sub-Inspector, respectively, would be made by the Deputy Inspector-General of the range in accordance with the principles given in Rule 131.
While construing these provisions in Karnail Singh Sub Inspector of Police, Karnal v. The State of Haryana through the Commissioner and Secretary Home, Government of Haryana at Chandigarh and others, 1989(2) RSJ 536, this is what the Court had to say in paragraph 4 of the report :  "On the question of competency of the Superintendent of Police to pass the impugned order, the stand of the respondents does not seem to be correct.
The stand of the respondents is that appointing authority of Assistant Sub Inspectors and Sub Inspectors is Superintendent of Police as provided under Rule 121 of Chapter XII of the Punjab Police Rules as applicable in Haryana, Superintendent of Police is also the punishing authority of Sub-Inspectors and Assistant Sub Inspectors as provided under Rule 161 of Chapter XVI of the Police Rules.
Thus the Superintendent of Police was competent to pass the impugned order retiring the petitioner from service on giving three months notice.
After careful consideration I find that this contention cannot be accepted in the present case as the petitioner was promoted to the post of Assistant Sub Inspector as well as Sub Inspector by the Deputy Inspector General of Police.
No doubt the Superintendent of Police is the appointing authority of Assistant Sub Inspectors and Sub Inspectors as provided under Rule 121, however, this rule provides the authorities competent to make appointments.
There is a separate chapter dealing with the promotions i.e. Chapter XIII in the Police Rules.
Rule 133(2) empowers the Deputy Inspector General of Police to make promotions to the rank of Inspectors.
It also provides for substantive promotions to the rank of Sub Inspectors and Assistant Sub Inspectors to be made by Superintendent of Police in the case of District Police.
Rule 134(2) provides for officiating promotions to the rank of Sub Inspector, Assistant Sub Inspector and Head Constables to be made by Superintendent of Police in the District and if the Deputy Inspector General of Police finds the flow of promotion unevenly distributed amongst districts, he can make suitable transfers.
The relevant rules concerning the case in hand are Rules 139 and 1310.
This gives power to the Deputy Inspector General of Police for making officiating or substantive promotion to the rank of Assistant Sub Inspector.
Sub-rule (2) of Rule 139 further provides for making substantive promotion of Assistant Sub Inspectors by the Deputy Inspector General of Police in accordance with sub-rule (2) of rule 134.
Rule 1310 further provides for officiating promotions of short duration to be ordinarily made within the District concerned vide sub-rule 134(2), but vacancies of long duration are to be filled by the Promotion of any eligible man in the range at the discretion of the Deputy Inspector General".
6.
It is, therefore, obvious that the order of compulsory retirement having been made by the Superintendent of Police cannot be sustained.
Mr. Jain's argument that the petitioner had been promoted to the rank of Assistant Sub- Inspector and subsequently to the rank of Sub Inspector by the Superintendent of Police which made this officer the appointing authority, cannot be sustained for the reasons given above and for the reasons that the Police Rules having statutory force must be given pre-eminence.
7.
Mr. Laler's alternative argument however does not deserve acceptance.
It will be seen that the petitioner has been retired under Rule 326 of the Rules read with Rule 918 (c) & (d) of the Police Rules and under Rule 918(2) thereof.
8.
For the reasons recorded above, the present petition is allowed, the notice annesure P-2 and the relieving order Annexure P-3 are quashed.
Liberty is however left with the respondents to pass yet another order of compulsory retirement in case they deem it appropriate.
Petition allowed.