GS Singhvi, J - In response to advertisement No. 4 of 1996 issued by the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana (re-named as the Haryana Staff Selection Commission) (for short the Commission), the petitioner applied for recruitment as Science Mistress.
Her grievance is that by adopting a wholly irrational and arbitrary criteria for short-listing the candidates to be called for interview, the respondent-Commission has deprived her of the opportunity to be considered for selection and appointment against one of the advertised posts.
2.
The respondents have not filed written statement.
However, the learned Deputy Advocate General, produced the application form, allegedly submitted by the petitioner, to show that it is unsigned.
3.
Shri Jitender Dhanda, argued that the non-consideration of the petitioner's candidature has resulted in depriving her of a valuable right guaranteed by Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
He submitted that the criteria adopted by the respondent-Commission for short-listing the candidates to be called for viva voce arbitrary and irrational.
Shri Parmod Goyal, submitted that the non-consideration of the petitioner's candidature is justified because her application was unsigned and was legally non-existent.
He invited our attention to the order dated 371998 passed in Civil Writ Petition No. 7420 of 1998, Vinod Kumar v. State of Haryana and others : 1997(2) SCT 769 (P&H); Shri Goyal further submitted that the Commission is empowered to devise appropriate mechanism for limiting the number of candidates to be called for viva voce and as such the exercise undertaken by it for short-listing the candidates to be called for interview does not call for interference by the High Court.
In support of this argument he relied on the judgment of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 3692 of 1998, Pushap Lata and another v. State of Haryana and others decided on August 25, 1998.
4.
On our asking, Shri Goyal made available the original application form of the petitioner for inspection by Shri Jitender Dhanda.
After perusing the application form, the learned Counsel for the petitioner expressed his inability of offer any explanation as to why the petitioner did not sign the application form.
5.
We have considered the respective submissions and have perused the record of the case as well as the application form allegedly submitted by the petitioner.
In Vinod Kumar's case (supra), the Court had the occasion to consider question whether the recruiting agency like the respondent- Commission can consider the candidature of a person who has submitted unsigned application.
While rejecting the claim of the petitioner that a writ of mandamus be issued directing the Commission to interview him, the Court held as under :-  "In our opinion, the Commission could not have taken cognizance of the unsigned application alleged to have been submitted by the petitioner.
As a matter of fact, the same should have outrightly been rejected.
It appears to us that in view of the large number of applications received by it, the Commission took physical test of all the candidates without scrutiny of the applications.
Likewise, it failed to undertake proper scrutiny of the applications at the time of short-listing of the candidates.
However, this omission on the part of the Commission cannot give rise to an inference that the Commission should be directed to treat the petitioner eligible for recruitment as Assistant Sub-Inspector ignoring the fact that the application allegedly submitted by him was unsigned.
xxx xxx xxx xxx We are also not inclined to agree with Shri Malik that it was a case of inadvertent omission.
It is not possible to believe that a candidate who filled up 12 out of the 13 columns forgot to append his signatures under the declaration contained in column No. 14.
To us, it appears that the omission was intentional and the petitioner wanted to create a situation in which the things could be manipulated for the purpose of securing his selection and there is no reason why the Court should encourage such a practice.
For the reasons mentioned above, we hold that the Commission has not committed any illegality by deciding (not) to interview the petitioner.
We also hold that the application submitted by the petitioner had no legal existence and the Commission has rightly refused to interview the petitioner."
6.
In our opinion, the ratio of the decision in Vinod Kumar's case deserves to be applied to the case of the petitioner for declining the relief to her.
7.
We also agree with Shri Goyal that in view of the decision of the Division Bench in Pushap Lata's case (supra) no direction can be given to the respondents to consider the petitioner for appointment as Science Mistress against the advertised posts.
Admittedly, the minimum cut off marks fixed for the determination of eligibility of the candidates to be called for viva voce is 33 and the petitioner has not secured 33 marks on the basis of her academic attainment etc.
In view of this, it is not possible to direct the respondent-Commission to entertain the candidature of the petitioner.
8.
For the reason mentioned above and those record in Pushap Lata's case (supra), which shall be treated as part of this order, the writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.