GS Singhvi, J - The question that arises for adjudication in this petition is whether a person who has passed JBT examination conducted by the Punjab Education Department is eligible to be appointed as J.B.T.
Teacher in the services of the State of Haryana.
2.
The petitioner possesses the following qualifications and experience :  Qualifications :-  (i) Matric (1980) from Punjab School Education Board.
(ii) JBT (1982) from Punjab Education Department.
Teaching Experience (i) Worked as JBT Teacher in Government Primary School, Sirhind (Punjab) from 211984 to 3041984.
(ii) Worked as Teacher in Shri Sanatan Dharam Sabha High School, Jagadhari (recognised by the Government of Haryana) from 1101986 to 1541987.
(iii) Worked as Teacher in Vivek Public School from 141995 to 15.11.1996.
3.
She applied for recruitment as JBT Teacher in pursuance of advertisement No. 6 of 1997 issued by the Haryana Staff Selection Commission (hereinafter referred to as the Commission) (published in the newspapers dated 22121997).
After scrutiny of the applications received by it, the Commission rejected her candidature on the ground that she has not passed JBT from an institution recognised by the Government of Haryana.
She has prayed for quashing of that decision on the ground of violation of the doctrine of equality embodied in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
She has pleaded that the Commission is estopped from questioning her eligibility because the Government of Haryana has recognised all those qualifications which stand recognised by the Government of India and JBT of Punjab is one of them.
4.
Respondents No. 1 and 2 have relied on the decision taken by the Government of Haryana in 1981 de-recognising JBT course of Punjab to justify the Commission's action to reject the petitioner's application.
In a separate written statement filed through its Secretary, Shri BR Chalwa, the Commission has also justified the rejection of the petitioner's application on the ground that she does not possess recognised JBT qualification.
5.
Shri Arun Palli assailed the decision of the Commission by arguing that JBT qualification awarded by the sister State cannot be ignored by the Government of Haryana for the purpose of employment in its services, more so when such qualification stands recognised by the Government of India.
He argued that the decision taken by the State Government in April, 1981 cannot be applied with retrospective effect so as to adversely affect candidates like the petitioner who had taken admission in the JBT course conducted by the institutions situated in Punjab prior to 1981.
He relied on the following decisions :  (1) Suresh Pal and others v. State of Haryana and others, AIR 1987 SC 2027.
(2) Madhu Bala Sethi v. The State of Haryana and others, 1989(2) RSJ 613; and  3.
Neelam Kumari v. State of Punjab and others, 1993(1) RSJ 327 : 1993(1) SCT 770.
6.
The learned Deputy Advocate General invited our attention to the proposal submitted by the Director of Education, Haryana in March, 1981 for de- recognition of the JBT course conducted by the Punjab Education Department and its approval by the Minister of Education, Haryana to show that the instructions issued by the Director, Secondary Education, Haryana vide memo No. 4/9-80 T.M.
(2) dated 2181981 and memo No. 12/2-84-T.M.
dated 1091984 are based on the government's decision to de-recognise the JBT course conducted by the Punjab Education Department.
He argued that in view of the conscious policy decision taken by the State Government to de-recognise the JBT course conducted by/under the authority of the Punjab Education Department, the petitioner cannot be considered for appointment as JBT Teacher in pursuance of the advertisement issued by the Commission.
7.
We have thoughtfully considered the respective submissions and have carefully gone through the documents placed on record.
The essential qualifications specified in the advertisement issued by the Commission for recruitment of JBT Teachers are :  "Essential qualifications : (i) Matriculation from the Board of School Education, Haryana or its equivalent as recognised by the Board of School Education, Haryana.
(ii) Passed two years Junior Basic Training Course or Diploma in Education Training Course from Haryana Education Department or its equivalent recognised by the Haryana Government.
(iii) Knowledge of Hindi up to Matric standard."
8.
The issue of recognition of the degrees, diplomas and examinations conducted by the institutions situated outside the State of Haryana has received the attention of the Government of Haryana from time to time.
Vide letter No. 2148-Edu.II(4-E)/75/8784 dated 1831975, the Education Commissioner and Secretary to Government, Haryana, Education Department circulated the policy decision of the government on the issue of recognition of different qualifications for appointment in the services of the State of Haryana.
The extract of the translation of this circular reads as under:  "Copy of letter No. 2148/Edu.II(4-E)/75/8784 dated 1831975 from the Education Commissioner and Secretary to Govt. Haryana, Education Department addressed to all heads of departments etc.  Subject : Recognition of different type of qualifications for appointments.
Sir,  Attention is invited to the subject noted above.
You are informed that the question of making changes in the present policy of Government regarding grant of recognition of different kinds of qualifications has been under the consideration of the Govt. from some time.
Now the Govt. has taken the following decisions:  1.
The degrees and diplomas etc. which are recognised by the Govt. of India will be deemed to be recognised by Haryana Govt. 2.
The degrees and diplomas etc. which are issued by the recognised universities and High /Higher Secondary Board established by the State will also be recognised.
3.
In addition to this, if any reference is received from any State Govt. in respect of other degrees/diploma the same will be examined and such diplomas/degrees etc. will be recognised on reciprocal basis.
4.
Besides the above, requests are also received from some other institutions for recognition which are not covered by any of the three categories particularly such institutions as are run for misc. and art etc.
Some of these institutions are already recognised.
In respect of such institutions and the degrees/diplomas awarded by them no general policy can be laid down.
If there is any such request it can be considered on its merits.
In the above decisions, Universities mean such recognised Universities :-  (i) which are established in any State of India by law.
(ii) Certificates, diplomas, degrees awarded by Punjab, Sindh or Dacca Universities in respect of Examination conducted before 15.8.1947.
(iii) Any other University which is declared as recognised by the Govt. xx xx xx" 9.
It appears that up to 1979, the Government of the State of Punjab had also treated various courses conducted by the institutions of the Government of Haryana as recognised but some time in 1980, it de-recognised JBT/BEd.
courses conducted by the Education Department of the Government of Haryana and in retaliation, the Director of Education, Haryana submitted a proposal for de-recognition of JBT and D.Ed.
courses/examinations conducted by the Punjab Education Department.
The same was approved by the then Minister of Education, Haryana on 741981 and was circulated by the Director, School Education vide Memo dated 2941981.
Later on, it was decided that the instructions circulated vide memo dated 2941981 will not affect those who had passed JBT Training Course from Punjab upto 2841981.
This is borne out from memo No. 4/9/80 TM(2) dated 2181981, the English translation of which is reproduced below :  "From  Director Secondary Education, Haryana  Chandigarh.
To  1.
All the District Education Officers in the State  2.
All the Sub Divisional Education Officers in the State  Memo No. 4/9/80 TM(2) dated 2181981  Sub : Recognition of the JBT Training course conducted by the State of Punjab in Haryana State.
Reference this office memo No. 9/9-80-Co(2) dated 2941981 vide which you were informed that the State of Haryana has de-recognised the JBT training course conducted by the Punjab State w.e.f.
2941981.
It is clarified that the abovesaid decision will not affect those candidates who have passed JBT training course from Punjab State upto 2841981.
Sd/- Kamla Chhikara Assistant Director School-II for Director Secondary Education Haryana, Chandigarh" 10.
In 1983-84, instructions were issued by the Directorate of Education, Haryana authorising the District Education Officers to make appointment of ad hoc teachers/masters/mistresses.
When some of the District Education Officers sought clarification and guidelines about the qualifications of teachers, the Director, School Education, Haryana issued memo dated 1091984, the relevant extracts of the English translation of which is reproduced below :  "From  Director School Education, Haryana,  Chandigarh.
To  All the District Education Officers of the State.
Memo No. 12/2-84/TM(2)  dated Chandigarh the 1091984  Subject : Regarding qualifications of teachers.
Vide this Directorate memo No. 12/2-84 TM(2) dated 27.6.1984, the District Education Officers had been authorised for making ad hoc appointments of Teachers and Masters/Mistresses.
Prior to that, vide demi official letter No. 12/11-83-TM(2) dated 3111983, all the District Education Officers had been intimated about the prescribed qualifications for the posts of Teachers/Masters/Mistresses/Lecturers.
As a consequence of letter dated 3111983 the ad hoc services of some such teachers who did not possess the qualifications mentioned in the letter dated 3111983, were terminated.
But it has not been observed that some such ad hoc teachers have either been regularised or have been granted equivalence grade certificate who possessed the qualifications equivalent to those possessed by the teachers whose services were terminated.
Therefore, you were directed vide demi official letter No. 12/-84(2) dated 2171984 to re-appoint all such terminated teachers and along with the circular dated 2171984 a list of such training courses from outside Haryana was also sent to you which were possessed by such ad hoc teachers who had been regularised or given equivalence grade certificates.
But even now many District Education Officers have been seeking guidelines from this directorate about the qualifications of teachers.
In this regard, your attention is invited to Govt. letter No. 2148/Edu.II-4E-75- 8784 dated 1831975 (copy enclosed) by which the policy of recognition in Haryana of degrees and diplomas from other States/Universities were intimated.
Therefore, the degrees/diplomas of other States/Universities may be considered in accordance with this policy.
The list of degrees/diplomas of such universities which had been recognised by the Kurukshetra University and which are recognised for appointments in Haryana State is enclosed.
So far as the training courses of JBT, OT, C.P.Ed.
and Arts and Crafts are concerned, it is stated that besides Haryana State, the following training courses of other States have been recognised by the Haryana Education Department.
1.
JBT (a) Two years JBT training from Chandigarh Administration., (b) Two years JBT training passed from Punjab Education Department prior to 2841981.
2.
OT/Sanskrit/Hindi/Punjabi.
OT Hindi/Sanskrit (now Shiksha Shastri/Punjabi passed from Chandigarh Administration.
3.
C.P.Ed.
One year C.P.Ed.
course being conducted by Director of Sports and Youth Services, Pune (Maharashtra) 4.
Arts & Crafts (a) Two years Arts & Crafts training course being conducted by Chandigarh Administration.,  (b) Two years Arts & Crafts training course being conducted by Jamia Milia Islamia University, Delhi.
xx xx xx" It is also clarified here that in addition to those teachers who have been re-appointed or are being re-appointed as a consequence of circular dated 2171984, no other teacher be appointed on ad hoc basis who does not possess the qualifications prescribed in the circular dated 3111983 (copy enclosed).
The reservation policy of the State Government be complied with strictly while making ad hoc appointment.
Please send acknowledgement of the letter.
Sd/- Deputy Director-III for Director School Education, Haryana Chandigarh.
A careful study of these documents shows that the policy decision taken by the Government of Haryana in 1975 to grant deemed recognition to the degrees/diplomas/certificates and examinations, which were recognised by the Government of India or which were awarded/conducted by the other State Governments and the Universities, Boards etc., was modified in April, 1981 so far as JBT and D.Ed.
courses conducted by the Education Department of the Government of Punjab are concerned.
This modification was implemented by the Education Department w.e.f.
2941981.
It must, therefore, be held that a candidate passing JBT or D.Ed.
course/examination conducted by the Education Department, Punjab could not claim consideration for employment in the services of the State of Haryana after 2941981 on the basis of deemed recognition of his/her qualification.
As a logical corollary, we shall have to proceed on the premise that on the date of issuance of advertisement No. 6 of 1997, JBT and D.Ed.
courses/examinations conducted by the Punjab Education Department or the institutions situated in the State of Punjab were not recognised by the Government of Haryana as equivalent to JBT/BEd.
courses conducted by the Haryana Education Department.
Thus, the decision taken by the Commission not to consider the petitioner for recruitment as JBT Teacher is neither arbitrary nor illegal.
11.
The argument of Shri Arun Palli, which is based on the doctrine of promissory estoppel, deserves to be rejected because the petitioner has not laid factual foundation which could justify her attempt to invoke the doctrine of promissory or equitable estoppel.
She has neither pleaded nor proved that she had taken admission in the JBT course in Punjab by believing that the said course is recognised by the Government of Haryana and after acquiring the particular qualification, she will become eligible to be considered for employment in the service of the Government of Haryana.
To us, it is clear that the petitioner joined JBT course in Punjab because she was a resident of that State till her marriage with a person who is a native of Haryana.
In view of this, it cannot be said that the petitioner took admission in the JBT course in Punjab by acting on an express or implied promise made by the Government of Haryana that she will, after passing JBT course conducted by the institutions of the Government of Punjab, be eligible to be appointed in its services.
Therefore, we cannot invoke the doctrine of promissory/equitable estoppel for quashing the decision taken by the respondent-Commission.
12.
The decisions relied upon by Shri Palli are clearly distinguishable.
A reading of the decision of Suresh Pal's case (supra) shows that the Apex Court had believed the version of the appellants that they had taken admission in the certificate course in Physical Education in Shri Hanuman Vayayam Prasarak Mandal, Amravati, Maharashtra on the basis of recognition granted by the Government of Haryana in 1975 and were receiving instructions in that institution until January, 1985 when the State of Haryana de-recognised the certificate course.
On the basis of this factual foundation, the Apex Court held that "it would be unjust to tell the petitioners now that though at the time of their joining the course it was recognised, yet they cannot be given the benefit of such recognition and the certificate obtained by them would be futile, because during the pendency of the course it was de-recognised by the State Govt. on 9th January, 1985."
13.
In Madhu Bala Sethi's case (supra), the learned Single Judge held that the Art and Crafts Training Course conducted by the Government College of Arts, Chandigarh is recognised by the Government of Haryana and, therefore, the petitioner cannot be denied consideration for appointment as Art and Craft Teacher in the services of the Government of Haryana.
In paragraph 3 of the judgment, the learned Single Judge made reference to the decision of the Supreme Court in Suresh Pal's case (supra) and then observed as under :  "In the present case no written statement on behalf of the respondent-State of Haryana has been filed indicating that Two-year Arts and Crafts Training Course run by the Chandigarh Administration was at any stage de-recognised.
It was only in the advertisement for the post of teacher, Annexure P.3, that while giving qualifications it was mentioned that the Diploma Course would also be one of the qualifications.
Be that as it may, since the Two-year Arts and Crafts Diploma Course conducted by the Chandigarh Administration stands recognised by the State of Haryana as it shown from Annexure P.6, it would be discriminatory to debar the petitioner from joining the post of teacher which was advertised only on the ground that in the advertisement equivalent post was not mentioned."
14.
In Neelam Kumari's case (supra), which was decided by the Full Bench, it has been held that by virtue of the letter dated 951960 issued by the Secretary to Government, Punjab, Education Department, the diploma certificate issued by the State of Haryana would be deemed to be recognised.
Their Lordships of the Full Bench also relied on the observations made in Suresh Pal's case (supra).
15.
From what we have noticed above, it is clear that the decisions relied upon by Shri Palli were decided on their own facts and none of them has got any bearing on the issue which we have decided.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.