GS Singhvi, J - The question that arises for adjudication in this case is whether the petitioner is entitled to be appointed on compassionate grounds on a Class-III post ?
2.
While working as Junior Engineer in the Irrigation Department, Shri Kundan Lal, father of the petitioner, died on 211993.
He was survived by one son i.e. the petitioner, two daughters and a widow.
The petitioner's mother applied for his compassionate appointment in accordance with the instructions issued by the Government of Haryana for compassionate appointment of the dependents of deceased Government servants.
After about 2 years, the petitioner filed C.W.P.
No. 15181 of 1995 for issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to consider and appoint him as Taxation Inspector in the Excise and Taxation Department and/or on any other class-III post in Irrigation Department commensurate with his qualifications.
The same was disposed of by this Court on 22.1.1997.
The relevant portion of the Court's order is reproduced below :  "We have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner and the learned Assistant Advocate General and in our opinion, the respondents have not considered the candidature of the petitioner in an objective manner and failure of the respondents to do so has resulted in grave injustice to the petitioner.
There is nothing in the reply filed by the respondents to indicate that the respondents considered the issue relating to the appointment of the petitioner keeping in view his academic qualification of graduation.
As on 2041995, there did not exist any restriction on the appointment of the petitioner on the post of Inspector or an equivalent post.
However, without examining the claim of the petitioner for appointment on a suitable post commensurate with his qualification, the respondents offered to him the post of a Clerk.
The petitioner has pointed out that other persons seeking employment on compassionate grounds have been given higher posts but the respondents have not been able to offer any explanation as to why such post could not be offered to him.
In our opinion, it is an eminently fit case where the respondents should be directed to consider the petitioner's case afresh for appointment on compassionate grounds keeping in view the policy instructions issued by the Government form time to time.
Consequently, we dispose of the writ petition by directing the respondents to consider the claim of the petitioner for compassionate appointment on an appropriate post keeping in view his qualifications.
This should be done within a period of three months of the submission of a certified copy of this order and a reasoned order should be communicated to the petitioner within the aforementioned period."
3.
In the purported compliance of the direction given by the High Court, the Engineer-in-Chief/Construction, Irrigation Department, Haryana passed the impugned order Annexure P.8 and offered the post of Clerk to the petitioner.
4.
Feeling dissatisfied with the order of his appointment as Clerk, the petitioner has filed this petition with the prayer that a direction be issued to the respondents to appoint him on a post carrying one pay scale below the pay scale in which has father was drawing salary at the time of his death i.e. Rs. 2000-3200.
5.
On 12111998, we had adjourned the case on the request of the learned Deputy Advocate General who wanted to impress upon the departmental authorities to suo-motu reconsider the petitioner's case for appointment on compassionate grounds of a post carrying one pay scale lower than the pay scale of his father.
However, revised order appointing the petitioner on a post carrying one pay scale lower than the pay scale of Rs. 2000-3200 has not been passed so far.
This shows that the respondents are not inclined to remedy the petitioner's grievance without the Court's order.
6.
We have heard Shri NK Joshi and Shri Jaswant Singh.
7.
The instructions issued by the Government of Haryana vide letter No. 16/5/95-5 GSII dated 851995 postulated compassionate appointment on a post one step lower than the one held by the deceased employee.
The expression `one step lower' was clarified by Haryana Government vide circular letter No. 15/5/95-6 GSII dated 3181995 in the following words :  "One step lower" employment is interpreted as `One pay scale Below' that of the deceased employee.
It is further clarified that appointment on compassionate grounds under ex-gratia scheme can be offered only on a post in a pay scale lower than that of the deceased employee."
A bare reading of the above extracted clarification shows that while considering the issue of compassionate appointment, the competent authority should take into consideration the actual pay scale in which the deceased employee was drawing salary.
Vide circular letter No. 16/5/95 6 GSII dated 1581998, this position has been further clarified though in terms of para 3 of the said circular, the instructions contained therein have made applicable prospectively.
8.
In a given case, the post on which the deceased employee was working may carry different grades.
In that case, the grade in which the deceased was receiving pay has to be taken into consideration and not in other grades/pay scales Therefore, we find force in the submission of Shri Joshi that the Engineer-in-Chief has gravely erred in giving offer to the petitioner to accept the post of Clerk ignoring the fact his father was drawing salary in the pay scale of Rs. 2000-3200 at the time of his death.
9.
On the basis of above discussion, we allow the writ petition and directed the respondents to consider the petitioner's case for appointment on a post carrying pay scale lower than the scale of Rs. 2000-3200.
In the first instance, his case shall be considered for appointment within the Irrigation Department in which Shri Kundan Lal was working.
Appropriate order be passed by the competent authority within one month of the submission of certified copy of this order.
If no post in the one pay scale lower than the pay scale of Rs. 2000-3200 is available in the Irrigation Department, then his case shall be forwarded to the office of the Chief Secretary, Haryana at the end of aforesaid period of one month for consideration and passing of appropriate order within next 3 months keeping in view the observations made by the Court in Surinder Pal v. State of Haryana, 1998(3) RSJ 65.
Petition allowed.