Swatanter Kumar, J (Oral) - These three writ petitions under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India have been filed with a prayer that a writ, order or direction be issued quashing Instruction No. 12 of Note-2 (Annexure P/8) issued by the Central Board of Secondary Education (hereinafter referred to as the Central Board.
2.
Since these writ petitions arise on common premises and raise common controversies of law, therefore, it would be appropriate to dispose of these writ petitions by a common judgment.
3.
Petitioners in these writ petitions had appeared in the matriculation examination from Government High School duly recognised and/or affiliated to the Central Board.
They took matriculation examination in March, 1997.
The result of the matriculation examination was declared in June, 1997 and all the petitioners were placed in compartment.
These students continued their studies in higher class and/or changed the school to Government Senior Secondary Schools.
For instance, Mr. Manish, who was studying in Government High School, Sector 22-C, Chandigarh got admission in Government Model Senior Secondary School, Sector 23, Chandigarh and ultimately got migrated to Government Model Senior Secondary School, Sector 20-D, Chandigarh.
The petitioners then took the compartment examination (first attempt) in August, 1997 but could not clear the examination, However, they continued to study in 11th class of the course.
In April, 1998, alongwith other students of regular sessions, these petitioners also took main examination alongwith compartment examination (second chance) as well.
In June, 1998, result of both these examinations taken by the petitioners were declared and they were declared successful in both the examinations.
4.
Resultantly, they were admitted to the 12th Class as regular students in the same institution under the same Board.
These students were admitted to 12th Class in April, 1998 in the regular academic sessions.
Thereafter, they submitted their examination form, after attending the course which were sent by their respective schools to the Central Board for the allotment of the roll number.
However, in the case of the some of the petitioners, the examination form were not forwarded, in view of the directions issued by the respondent- Board, Annexure P/7, appended with CWP No. 14460 of 1998, which is undated.
The Note-2 of Annexure P/7 disqualifies the petitioners from taking examination of 11th and/or 12th class, as the cases may.
Note 2 of Annexure P/7 prohibited the students from taking class 11th examination and also taking the second chance of the compartment examination.
The said Note 2 of Annexure P/7 read as under :-  "2.
It is also brought to the notice of the Head of the Institution that those candidates who appear for the Secondary School Examination and are placed in compartment and in case such students fail to qualify the examination at 1st Chance Compartment Examination they are not eligible to continue provisionally in Class XI.
If such students have been granted provisional admission to class XI, the admission may be cancelled forthwith as they cannot appear simultaneously for Class XI as well as 2nd Chance Comptt.
examination in next years."
Another instruction was issued by the Central Board, vide Annexure P/8 appended with C.W.P.
No. 14460 of 1998, wherein the similar restrictions were placed upon the students by clause 12 of the instructions that reads as under :-  "12.
No candidate who has passed the Secondary School Examination (Class X) at the 2nd chance Comptt.
examination in 1998 is eligible to appear in class XI in 1999."
On the basis of the aforestated two instructions, all the petitioners were not permitted to take the 12th and/or 11th class examinations, as they were not issued the roll number.
This resulted in the filing of the present writ petitions by the petitioners.
Instructions in Annexure P/9 has given the last date for admission as 21st September, 1998.
The writ petition filed by the petitioners came up for hearing before the Hon'ble Division Bench on 11th September, 1998, on which date the notice to show cause was issued returnable on 21st September, 1998.
On 21st September, 1998, as the respondents prayed for time to file reply, the Hon'ble Division (Bench) passed the following interim order :-  "Written statement may be filed within two weeks.
Replication before the next date.
Meanwhile, the petitioners will be permitted to attend the course for class 10+2 (12th Class), subject to further orders of the Court."
5.
The interim order was continued and the petitioners had taken the practical examinations of class 11 and/or 12 as the case may be.
As per directions dated 14th December, 1998, the Hon'ble Division (Bench) issued rule in the writ petition and also directed the respondents to forward the final examination forms of each of the petitioners for examination of class 12 to the Central Board, subject to further orders.
That is how these writ petitions have come up for hearing before me today.
6.
The above case of the petitioners has been contested by the respondents primarily on the ground that under the relevant Examination Bye-laws issued by the respondent-Board, the petitioner are not eligible to take examination of 11th and/or 12th classes, as the case may be.
Reliance has been placed on clauses 74 and 101 of the Examination Bye-laws to substantiate this plea.
7.
Learned counsel for the parties have addressed diverse arguments, which I do not think would be necessary to be considered because the moot question that falls for consideration in these writ petitions, is that, whether as per the Examination Bye-laws issued by the respondent-Board, the petitioners- students are eligible to appear in the final examination of 11th and/or 12th class as the case may be.
8.
The question of retrospectivity, to my mind, does not arise for consideration because the bye-laws as they existed are of the year 1995 and it is conceded by the learned counsel for the respondent-Board that Note-2 and Condition 12 of Annexures P/7 and P/8 respectively are the interpretation of the aforestated Examination By-laws, as per the Board.
9.
In order to examine the merit of the respective contentions raised by the learned counsel for the parties, reference to Examination Bye-laws issued by respondent-Board would be but necessary.
These bye-laws have been named as "Examination Bye-laws" of the Central Board of Secondary Education, Delhi.
They were made effect from 31st January, 1995 upon their publication in accordance with law.
Relevant bye-laws are 74, 101, 401, 411, 412 and 42.
They reads as under :  74 Admission to Class XI in a School shall be open only to such a student who has passed :- (a) Secondary School Examination (Class X examination) conducted by the Board; or (b) an equivalent examination conducted by any other recognised Board of Secondary Education/Indian University and recognised by this Board as equivalent to its secondary school examination.
101 A candidate for All India/Delhi Senior School Certificate examination should have :- (a) passed the secondary school certificate examination (Class X) of this Board or an equivalent examination, from any other recognised Board/University at least two years earlier than the year in which he/she would take Senior School Certificate Examination (Class XII) of the Board; and (b) secured a grade higher than grade E in each of the subjects of internal assessment at Secondary School Examination (Class X) referred to at (a) above.
401 Pass Criteria (Senior School Certificate Examination) (i) A candidate will be eligible to get the Pass Certificate of the Board, if he/she gets a grade higher than E in all subject of internal assessment unless he/she is exempted.
Failing this, result of the external examination will be withheld but not for a period of more than one year.
(ii) In order to be declared as having passed the examination, a candidates shall obtain a grade higher than E (i.e atleast 33% marks) in all the five subjects of external examination in the main or at the compartmental examinations.
The pass marks in each subject of external examination shall be 33%.
In case of a subject involving practical work a candidate must obtain 33% marks in theory and 33% marks in practical separately in addition to 33% marks in aggregate in order to qualify in that subject.
(iii) No overall division/distinction/aggregate shall be awarded.
(iv) In respect of a candidate offering an additional subject, the following norms shall be applied : (a) A language offered as an additional subject may replace a language in the event of a candidate failing in the same provided after replacement the candidate has English/Hindi as one of the languages.
(b) An elective subject offered as an additional subject may replace one of the elective subjects offered by the candidate.
It may also replace a language provided after replacement the candidate has English/Hindi as one of the languages.
(c) Additional language offered at elective level may replace an elective subject provided after replacement, the number of languages offered shall not exceed two.
(v) Candidates exempted from one or more subjects of internal examination shall be eligible for appearing in external examination and result shall be declared subject to fulfilment of other conditions laid down in the Pass Criteria.
411 Pass Criteria (Secondary School Examinations) (i) A candidate will be eligible to get the Pass Certificate of the Board, if he/she gets a grade higher than E in all subjects of internal assessment unless he/she is exempted.
Failing this, the result of the external examination will be withheld but not for a period of more than one year.
(ii) In order to be declared as having passed the examination, a candidate shall obtain a grade higher than E (i.e. at least 33% marks) in all the five subjects of External examination in the main or at the compartmental examinations.
The pass marks in each subject of external examination shall be 33%.
(iii) No overall division/distinction/aggregate shall be awarded.
(iv) In respect of a candidate offering an additional subject, the following norms shall be applied : (a) A language offered as an additional subject may replace a language in the event of a candidate failing in the same provided after replacement the candidate has English/Hindi as one of the languages; and (b) The replacement shall satisfy the conditions as laid down in the Scheme of Studies.
(v) Candidates excepted from one or more subjects of internal examination shall be eligible for appearing in external examination and result shall be declared subject to fulfilment of other conditions laid down in the Pass Criteria.
412 Eligibility for Compartment in Secondary Examination.
A candidate, failing in one of the five subjects of external examination shall be placed in Compartment in that subject provided he/she qualifies in all the subjects of internal assessment.
42.
Compartment Examination for Secondary/Senior School Certificate Examination.
(i) A candidate placed in compartment may reappear at the Compartmental Examination to be held in July/August and may avail himself/herself of the second chance in March/April next year.
The candidate will be declared passed provided he/she qualifies the Compartmental subject in which he/she had failed.
(ii) A candidate who does not appear or fails at one or both the chances of compartment shall be treated to have failed in the examination and shall be required to reappear in all the subjects including practical at a subsequent Annual Examination of the Board as per Syllabi and Courses laid down for the examinations concerned in order to pass the examination.
(iii) Syllabi and Courses for the Compartmental Candidates in March Examination shall be the same as applicable to the candidates of full subjects appearing at the examination.
(iv) A candidate placed in compartment shall be allowed to appear only in one subject at the Second Chance Compartmental Examination to be held in March/April next year.
(v) For subject involving practical work, in case the candidate has passed in practical at the main examination he/she shall appear only in theory part and previous practical marks will be carried forward and accounted for.
In case a candidate has failed in practical he/she shall have to appear in theory and practical both irrespective of the fact the he/she has already cleared the theory examination.
The cumulative effect of the above bye-laws is that the expression `fail' is used in the bye-laws in contra-distinction, to the expression `pass' and/or `compartment'.
These three expressions in the bye-laws obviously cannot be intended to mean one and the same thing or cannot be treated synonymous to each other.
These three expressions indicate and operate in a different sphere and field, which are neither inter-changeable nor substitutable.
A candidate, who has failed, cannot be said to have got compartment and if he has passed, the other two situations cannot be true about the same candidate.
Once a candidate get compartment, the ancillary question, which arises for consideration, is that whether he is eligible to take admission in the next course or not ?
The answer to this question has to be in the affirmative.
They bye-laws itself indicate that a person would be treated as compartment candidate if he does not fail in more than one paper with prescribed percentage.
If the candidate is permitted to be admitted in the next course and studies in the next class, his admission is treated as provisional and which automatically gets regularised upon the candidate passing the compartment examination.
At this stage, it would be very relevant to make a reference to Clause 3 of the brochure issued by the Government Senior Secondary Schools, Education Department Chandigarh Administration, that reads as under :- "3.
Students placed under compartment in the qualifying exam.
will be admitted provisionally.
They will be promoted to the next class only after having cleared the compartment examination."
The reading of the above clause clearly shows that the students who were compartment candidates, will be admitted provisionally and would be promoted to next class only after having cleared the compartment examination.
It is nobody's case before this Court that clause 3 is in excess of jurisdiction or that it is ultra-vires the bye-laws.
To my mind, clause 3 must be construed and read in harmony to the bye-laws issued by the Central Board.
10.
In all fairness this was not disputed by the learned counsel appearing for the respondent-board that a candidate, who has got compartment, is entitled to be admitted in the next course, subject to rules of the bye-laws.
The expression `compartment' cannotes distinct and clear meaning that the candidate has not failed.
A candidate who has failed is vested with different consequences, while the candidate who has got compartment is entitled to admission to the next course.
In other words the consequences of these two distinct results are different.
The distinction is clear for the candidate concerned, as well as imposes varied obligations on the institution as well as the controlling authority.
The intention of the rule making authority is more constructive and logical.
It is intended to prevent the wastage of a year of a candidate, as it would happen in the case of the candidate, who has failed simplicitor.
This intention, thus, cannot be undermined by any other interpretation because that will defeat the very object either of the bye-laws or the brochure.
11.
A Full Bench of this Court in the case of Swaranjit Singh and another v. State of Punjab and others, 1997(4) R.S.J.
512 : 1997(4) SCT 511 (P&H) (FB) has held that the authorities concerned would be bound by the terms and conditions of the brochure and the same cannot be varied or altered to the prejudice of the candidates, once they are publicly declared.
Having clarified this aspect of the matter, one must examine what is the meaning which should be givn to the "at least two years earlier than the year in which he/she take Senior School Certificate examination (Class XII) of the Board".
Certain enough, if two years expression has to be given arithmetical meaning `two' would be `two'.
12.
Giving numerical meaning to this terms does not appear to be the intent of law.
In academic courses a year normally means the academic year of the course specified by the Board or other competent authority.
Such approach would not only be in consonance with the legislative intent but would also predicate the possible pragmatic and permissible approach to this legal controversy.
They object and purpose of rule 101 is quite clear.
The purpose appears to be that a student must study two academic years ie academic sessions (years) of 11th Class and another academic sessions (years) of 12th class, before he takes up the Board examination of the 12th Class.
The object is laudable that the student should not be permitted to truncate the academic course and their prescribed period.
They must undertake academic sessions for the prescribed duration and in a regular manner.
This object is fully achieved as the students have attended regularly the entire academic course of 11 and 12 classes alongwith other regular students.
Thus, neither academic standard have been lowered nor the academic curriculum provided for such courses have been infringed.
Any other interpretation given to this expression would defeat the object of the legislation rather to achieve the same.
Amongst others, the following could be the reasons which could be indicated :  (a) if a candidate who has got compartment is not to be permitted to take the final examination, even if he has cleared the same in the 2nd chance, which is otherwise permissible, would in fact amount to placing the student in a position worse than of a failed candidate.
(b) arithmetical meaning of two years would render practically all the students including even the regular students ineligible to take the Board examination.
Thus, calendar two years can neither be practically true nor jurisprudentially permissible.
(c) This would result in an in-built discrimination between somewhat similar placed students.
It is admitted that the students, who have passed the compartment examination in the first instance have been permitted to take the same examination though obviously they would have not completed two years of course.
13.
It is a settled rule of interpretation of statute that wherever two interpretations are possible then where it would farther cause and the object of the statute must be adopted by the courts, unless such interpretation would destroy the legislative intent.
I have already discussed at some length that meaning of two years to be understood in its correct perspective, must be given meaning of two academic years in its spirit and substance.
These are the provisions regulating and controlling the examination conducted by the Central Board in relation to the students at large.
The meaning, as suggested by the learned counsel for the respondent-board would create a situation of absurdity in law.
14.
Rule of inconvenience, in any case, would come to the rescue of the petitioners in the facts and circumstances of the present case.
Condition No. 12 and Note-2, reproduced supra, cannot be said to carry the intent of bye-law 101 or 73.
They, in fact, are beyond the scope and purview of the bye-laws and amount to imposing a restriction, which is otherwise not permissible.
The bye-laws clearly permit taking of examination and admission to the next course.
The condition 12 and note-2 is causing an unreasonable restriction on the right of the students to take final examination for which they are otherwise eligible and have passed the prior examination as required under the rules.
These instruction are substantially contrary to the bye-laws and I would have no hesitation in setting aside these instructions being ultra-vires or beyond the scope of bye-laws.
15.
It is also not disputed that the petitioners in these cases were admitted to curriculum 11th Class in accordance with law as back as in June, 1997.
They continued their studies and cleared the 11th class examination in the first attempt alongwith clearing their compartment examination in the second attempt.
Thus, as on April, 1998, they had cleared 11th Class as well as 10th Class.
They were fully eligible to seek admission to 12th Class in April, 1998 when they were admitted alongwith other regular students to that class.
16.
Clause 3 of the brochure issued by the College comes to the rescue of the petitioners and in fact, despite these instructions, the Colleges had permitted the petitioners to continue their study in 11th as well as 12th class.
These instructions (Annexures P/7 and P/8) are not dated.
They are not self-explanatory as to on what premises and in consonance with bye-laws clause 12 are being circulated to the schools.
It is not known and nothing has been brought on record that these instructions were put to the candidates and they were put at notice so as to enable them to raise a place of estoppel against these candidates.
17.
The conduct of the respondents and non-disclosure of these instructions to the students to say the least would not permit the equitable principles of estoppel to be invoked against the students more particularly at this stage when after two years of regular study, they are about to take their final examination.
Another factor which helps the petitioners is that even in the Senior School Curriculum were issued in the year 1999-Volume-1.
Rule 27 sub-rule (II) clearly shows that a candidate, who does not appear or fail at one or both the chances, of the compartment, then he shall be treated to have failed in the examination and shall be required to re-appear in all the subjects including practical.
This is not even the case of the Central Board that the students were asked to re-appear and were declared failed at any stage.
18.
Learned counsel for the Central Board while placing emphasis on sub-clause 74, reproduced above, argued that to take admission to class 11 the candidate must pass class 10 examination.
In other words, he must not fail.
It means that a candidate who gets compartment would not be permitted to 11th Class.
The bye-laws, Prospectus, and the Curriculum issued by the Central Board clearly indicate that a compartment candidate has a right to be admitted to the next course, though obliged is the student to clear the compartment examination.
Thus, the arguments raised on behalf of the Central-Board merit rejection.
19.
Learned counsel appearing for the respondent, while further relying upon the cases AP Christians Medical Educational Society v. Government of Andhra Pradesh and Alice Monoranjani M and others v. Government of Andhra Pradesh and another, A.I.R. 1986, SC 1490 and CBSE and another v. P Sunil Kumar and others etc., A.I.R. 1998 SC 2235 : 1998(2) SCT 788 (SC), argued that the Courts must not interfere in grant of admission in courses and declaration of the result etc., when it is so prohibited by bye-laws.
There can be no dispute to the legal proposition enunciated in these judgments.
The Courts normally would not only be reluctant but would not interfere in the action of the specialised body in so far the action is in consonance with the bye-laws.
I have specifically held that the action of the respondent in issuing the above said instructions, Annexures P/7 and P/8 limited to the extent indicated above are not in consonance with the bye-laws and in fact it is a clear transgression on established principles governing the scope of permissible subordinate jurisdiction.
20.
All these candidates have admittedly studied for two years and as on today are fully eligible to appear in the examination.
No bye-law has been brought to my notice which disqualify a candidate or render ineligible if he has passed matriculation examination in the second attempt.
It is only the meaning which is being given to two years in terms of clause 101 which has been interpreted by the Board to be an implied bar for taking such an examination.
I am unable to appreciate the approach of the respondent board in this regard.
I therefore, hold that the petitioners are entitled to continue their study and appear in Class XII examination in the face of clauses 101 and 74 of the Bye-laws.
21.
Learned counsel appearing for the petitioners, while relying upon the cases Gurlal Singh and others v. The State of Punjab and others, 1998(3) R.S.J.
672 : 1999(1) SCT 311 (P&H), Ashok Chand Singhvi v. University of Jodhpur and others, 1998(1) R.S.J.
361 and Punjab University v. Subash Chander and another, A.I.R. 1984 SC 1415, argued that the students having got admission in accordance with law without any misrepresentation should in any case be permitted to complete their course as they are at their fag end of their course.
This argument of the petitioners deserves to be considered with merit.
The students are not at fault.
They were admitted in accordance with law.
They studied for two years undisputedly and have passed the 11th class in the first attempt.
This would make them fully eligible to take examination after one year academic sessions of the 11th class.
In these circumstances even the principles of equity which is very foundation of exercise of powers under the writ jurisdiction, would tilt in favour of the petitioners for grant of relief.
22.
For the aforestated reasons, I have no hesitation in quashing Note-2 and condition 12 of Annexures P/7 and P/8 respectively.
Consequently, the writ petitions of the petitioners are allowed.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.
However, it is directed that the examination forms, which had already been submitted to the Central-Board in furtherance to the order of the Hon'ble Division Bench dated 14121998 shall be duly processed by the Central Board and roll numbers be issued to the candidates within three day from today.
All the candidates, if otherwise would be entitled to take examination of 12th Class.
Accordingly the writ petition stands disposed of accordingly.
Copy of order be given dasti.
Petitions allowed.