DK Seth, J - By an order dated 15.7.1994, it was pointed out that in case no counter-affidavit is filed within the time so granted by the said order, the matter will be decided on the basis of the averments made in the writ petition.
Thereafter, by another order dated 2421997, the respondents were directed to decide the claim of the petitioner in respect of his retirement benefits while directing the matter to be listed after three months.
2.
At this stage, Mr. KR Singh, learned standing counsel prays for further time to file counter-affidavit.
According to him without such counter- affidavit, it is not possible for him to throw any light on the facts of this case.
3.
Mr. Satish Dwivedi, learned Counsel for the petitioner on the other hand contends that the petitioner had retired on 30.6.1979 and since then she is suffering on account of non-payment of her retirement benefits.
4.
I have heard both the learned Counsels at length.
5.
Retirement benefits is not a bounty payable on the sweet-will and pleasure of the Government and that, on the other hand, the right to pension is a valuable right vesting in a government servant.
The right of the person to receive pension is property under Article 31(1) and by a mere executive order the State had no power to withhold the same.
Similarly the said claim is also property under Article 19(1)(f) and it is not saved by sub-article (5) of Article 19.
Therefore, denial of right to receive pension affects the fundamental right of the person under Articles 19(1)(f) and 31(1) of the Constitution.
It was so held in the case of Deokinandan Prasad v. State of Bihar, AIR 1971 SC 1409.
In the case of Madan Mohan Pathak v. Union of India, AIR 1978 SC 803, the Apex Court had held that property in Art. 19, 31(1) and 31(2) must have the same connotation and since these are constitutional provisions are intended to secure a fundamental right they must receive the widest interpretation and must be held to refer to property of every kind.
Property within the meaning of Articles 19(1)(f) and 31(2) comprises every form of property, tangible or intangible, including debts and choses-in-action such as unpaid accumulation of wages, pension and cash grants.
Grant of payment of retirement benefits are part of the conditions of service which has been so interpreted in the case of State of M.P. v. Shardul Singh, 1970(1) SCC 108.
That the expression `conditions of service' is an expression of wide import.
It means all those conditions which regulate the holding of a post by a person right from the time of his appointment till his retirement and even beyond it in matters like pension etc.
In the case of Poonamal v Union of India, AIR 1985 SC 1196, it was observed by the Apex Court that pension is not merely a statutory right; it is the fulfilment of a constitutional promise inasmuch as it partakes the character of public assistance in case of unemployment, old age, disablement or similar other cases of undeserved want.
Relevant rules merely make effective the constitutional mandate.
Pension is a right, not a bounty or gratuitous payment.
The payment of pension does not depend upon the discretion of the Government but is governed by the relevant rules and any one entitled to the pension under the rules can claim it as a matter of right.
In the case of DS Nakara v. Union of India, AIR 1983 SC 130, the Apex Court had laid down that pension is neither a bounty nor a matter of grace depending upon the sweet-will of the employer, nor an ex-gratia payment.
It is a payment for the past service rendered.
It is a social welfare measure rendering socio- economic justice to those who in the hey-day of their life ceaselessly toiled for the employer on an assurance that in their old age they would not be left in lurch.
Pension as a retirement benefit is in consonance with and furtherance of the goals of the Constitution.
The most practical raison d'etre or pension is the inability to provide for oneself due to old age.
It creates a vested right and is governed by the statutory rules.
In the case of Salabuddin Mohd.
Yunus.
v. State of AP, AIR 1984 SC 1905, it was held that right to receive pension is a fundamental right which can be curtailed only in the manner provided in the Constitution.
It was further held that pension is property within the meaning of Article 31(1) of the Constitution and that it is also a right under Article 19(1)(f) which could not be restricted even as provided under clause (5) of Article 19 and that clause has no application to the right to receive pension.
Pension is not a bountry but a right earned by a Government servant on the basis of length of service, is also so recognised in the case of State of UP v. Brahm Datt Sharma, AIR 1987 SC 943.
6.
Admittedly, the writ petition is filed in 1991 while the matter remained pending for these long eight years.
The fact remains that the petitioner had retired on 30.6.1979.
It shows total indifference on the part of the respondents towards sufferings of the petitioners who had served them during best part of her life.
This Court does not approve such attitude towards employees by the respondents.
If the retirement benefits have not been paid, even during this period of 20 years, it is high time that the respondents should be made accountable.
The respondents are responsible for proper administration.
The retirement benefits ought to have been paid immediately on the date of retirement and all calculation should have been concluded and completed at least three months before a person retires and all such calculation should begin at least one year before the date of retirement.
If for some reason or the other, which may be unavoidable, the retirement benefits could not be sanctioned or paid on the very date of retirement, in that event, the same should be paid within a reasonable period which ordinarily should not exceed three months.
After having served for long years, an employee should not be made to suffer on account of non-availability of retirement benefits and bring upon him enormous sufferings only because of indifferent attitude of the administration, of which the retired person was a part.
By sanction of payment of retirement benefits, the administration does not show any sympathy or does not do any charity to the person retired.
It is his earned right which cannot be denied and is legitimately claimable as and when the same becomes due namely immediately after the retirement.
Even after this writ petition was filed, the respondents did not even care to put in any affidavit despite having suffered a stop order.
No instruction is forthcoming as to whether the order dated 2421997 was complied with or not.
Sufficient latitude and lenience has been shown by the Court.
The attitude of indifference cannot be forgiven.
The administration itself is responsible for bringing down such a situation, for which adequate compensation should be paid to the petitioner.
However, if the administration feels that any particular person is responsible for these laches and indifference, in that event, it would be open to the administration to recover such amount of compensation from the said responsible officer even if he has retired in the meantime.
It would also be open to the administration to fix responsibility and to take appropriate steps for recovering the compensation from those officers responsible for such delay, laches and indifference.
7.
In case all retirement benefits have not yet been paid to the petitioners, in that event the same should be paid to the petitioner within a period of six months from the date a copy of this order is produced before the concerned respondents.
Each respondent No. 1 to 4 are hereby directed to perform their part of the duty in order to enable the petitioner to receive the retirement benefits within the time stipulated above.
Any lapse on the part of the respondents shall make them liable for further compensation and appropriate orders in respect of such delay and laches.
The payment of retirement benefits relating to the pension for the current period shall be paid to the petitioner, if payable to her, on expiry of six months from the date a copy of this order is furnished to anyone or each of the respondents.
The arrears of retirement benefits as are admissible to the petitioner but not already paid shall be paid, to her within the same period, together with interest at the rate of 18% per annum simple.
In view of inordinate delay and indifference shown, the respondents shall compensate to the petitioner for her sufferings.
Such compensation is assessed at Rs. 50,000/-.
In case the retirement benefits are already paid, in that event, the interest shall be payable from the date when respective amounts became due and payable till the date of actual payment.
If such interest is not paid, the same should be paid within the time stipulated above.
The sum of Rs. 50,000/- should be calculated in such way in proportion of Rs. 2500/- per year with effect from 30.6.1979 till the date of such payment as might have been paid to her.
The petitioner shall furnish a copy of this order to each of the respondents within a period of two months.
The Writ Petition stands finally disposed of.
Let a copy of this order be issued to the learned Counsel for petitioner on payment of usual charges at the earliest.
8.
After the above order is passed, Mr. KR Singh, learned Standing Counsel, prays for re-consideration of the question regarding payment of compensation and submits that the said part may be deleted.
9.
Having regard to the facts and circumstances of this case, I do not find any reason to accede to the prayer made by Mr. Singh.
Petition disposed of.