TS Doabia, J - This petition has been filed under the following circumstances.
An order annexure `E' has been passed by the Addl.
Secretary to Government, Public Works Department.
This order reads as under :  "In the interest of Administration Sh. DP Khajuria Assistant Executive Engineer (Mech) presently posted in Mechanical Irrigation Construction Division Jammu is transferred and posted in Jammu Municipality against an available vacancy with immediate effect.
By order of Government of Jammu and Kashmir."
2.
The aforementioned order was challenged by this present writ petition.
Petitioner submits that he is Assistant Engineer and is holding charge of Executive Engineer (Mech.)
Jammu Municipality.
According to the petitioner by passing annexure `E' his chances of getting permanent post of Assistant Executive Engineer have been blocked.
3.
It is further stated that no employee can be sent to the Jammu Municipality until and unless Jammu Municipality is willing to have him.
It is further stated that on 6th of December 1997, Administrator of Municipality sent a communication to Commissioner-cum-Secretary Power Works Department intimating that Sh. DP Khajuria be not allowed to join Jammu Municipality.
4.
In my opinion so far as Government order passed on 2nd of January 1998 by Addl.
Secretary to Government, Power Works Department is concerned, it can be challenged by the Administrator Municipality only.
Present writ petitioner has no locus standi.
In this regard reference be made to the decision given by the Supreme Court of India in the case reported as Sh. Subhash Chandra and others v. Municipal Corporation of Delhi and another, AIR 1965 Supreme Court 1275.
A decision taken by the Municipal Corporation of Delhi was nullified by the Chief Commissioner Delhi.
Power was exercised under Section 232 of Punjab Municipal Act.
Municipal Corporation had given service benefits to the employee.
This as indicated above was taken away.
This action was challenged by the employees.
It was contended that the order passed by the Chief Commissioner Delhi is bad as this was passed without affording opportunity of hearing.
This contention was negatived.
It was held that the aggrieved party is the Municipal Corporation and as such employees cannot contend that the order is bad as it has been passed without hearing them.
In para 13 following observations have been made :  "The committee can therefore, acquiesce in it and waive the non-compliance by the State Government with the provisions of S. 235.
Since S. 235 does not require an opportunity to be given to parties affected by the order other than the Municipality the petitioners are not entitled to say that the order is bad."
5.
Thus person aggrieved in this case is Jammu Municipality and not the petitioner.
The petitioner thus has no locus standi in this matter.
The aforementioned decision given by the Supreme Court of India was followed by the Punjab and Haryana High Court in the case reported as Karam Singh v. State of Punjab, 1979 PLR 426.
Independently of above mere loss of chance of promotion, a right which is purely contingent, cannot be enforced at the instance of the petitioner.
6.
This petition is accordingly held to be not maintainable; the petitioner has no locus standi to challenge the order passed by the State Government on 2nd of January 1998.
Petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.