Kumar Rajaratnam, J - The petitioner was working as a Headmaster in the respondent school.
The respondent institution is an aided institution.
The petitioner was suspended by the respondent by an order dated 181994.
This order of suspension was challenged in MA 25/1994.
The petitioner in the MA 25/1994 filed an application seeking payment of subsistence allowance.
The tribunal rejected the application.
The reason given by the tribunal was that it is the State Government that has to pay the subsistence allowance during the period of suspension and not the management.
2.
The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the impugned order dated 4th July, 1996, is contrary to the law.
The learned counsel submitted that it was a grant-in-aid school and as per the Grant-in-aid Code the subsistence allowance should be paid by the institution from the Government.
The learned counsel relied on the Judgment of this Court reported in Shivaji High School v. Prabhakar Jotiba Bamane, ILR 1985 Kar.
page 3979, wherein the Division Bench of this Court held that the Primary liability to make payment is that of the management and that the management could however claim the same by way of reimbursement from the Government.
That being the position in law, it appears that there is a duty cast on the management to pay the subsistence allowance in accordance with the Karnataka Private Educational Institutions (Discipline and Control) Rules, 1978.
Rule 13 deals with subsistence allowance during suspension.
3.
It is not in doubt that the petitioner would be entitled to subsistence allowance during the period of suspension.
The only question was whether it should be the Government that should pay the subsistence allowance or the management.
This Court has held that the Primary responsibility to pay the subsistence allowance is with the management of the school.
That being so it is not and to pass the management to of the school.
That being so, it is not permissible for the management escape its legal liability to pay subsistence allowance and to pass the responsibility on to the Government it is also well settled law that nobody can defend oneself in an enquiry on an empty stomach.
4.
During the pendency of the revision petition, it was submitted by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the petitioner has been dismissed from service.
Aggrieved by the order of dismissal the petitioner has preferred an appeal to the Tribunal.
We are not concerned in this revision petition with the correctness of the order of dismissal.
We are only concerned with the fact that the petitioner has not been paid subsistence allowance in accordance with Rule, 13 during enquiry.
5.
In that view of the matter, there will be a direction directing the respondent to consider the case of the petitioner in accordance with Rule 13 of the Karnataka Private Educational Institutions (Discipline and Control) Rules, 1978, and to pay the subsistence allowance to the petitioner as expeditiously as possible.
The petitioner is directed to make an application before the respondent within four weeks from the date of receipt of this order.
On such application for subsistence allowance, the respondent shall consider it in accordance with law and pass appropriate orders within four weeks from the date of receipt of the application made by the Petitioner.
In that view of the matter the order passed by the Appellate Tribunal on the application in MA 25/1994, dated 471996, is set aside.
The CRP is allowed accordingly.
No costs.
Petition allowed.