RL Anand, J - Shri Bhupinder Singh, ex-Hindi Master serving in Government Middle School, Badalgarh, District Sangrur has filed the present petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India against respondents No. 1 to 3 praying for issuance of writ in the nature of certiorari seeking the quashment of the order dated 2991998 (Annexure P-19) vide which his services were terminated from the post of Hindi Master.
It has been averred by the petitioner that he passed Matriculation Examination in March 1988; did Prag Shastri from Panjab University in April, 1989.
He further passed Shastri (Honours in Sanskrit) 3 years course 1991-1994 from the Panjab University.
He further passed Shiksha Shastri (OT Sanskrit) with teaching of Sanskrit and teaching of Hindi as subjects in the year 1995 from Chandigarh Administration.
Further he passed M.A.
Part I (Hindi) Examination from Punjabi University, Patiala in April, 1996 as a correspondent student.
Likewise he passed MA Part II Hindi Examination from the same university.
He also improved his qualification by doing MA Hindi Part I in the year 1998.
The Departmental Selection Committee (Teaching) Punjab Education Department, Chandigarh advertised 1000 posts of Hindi Masters/Mistresses in the grade of Rs. 1640-2095 and the educational qualifications prescribed for the candidates were BA with Hindi as one of the subjects and B.Ed.
with Hindi as teaching subject.
The petitioner applied for the said post and was duly selected.
As a result of his selection, the petitioner joined the Government Middle School, Kuke District Kapurthala.
He made request of his transfer which was accepted and he was posted as Hindi Master in the Government Middle School, Badalgarh, District Sangrur on 2151997.
Though the petitioner has been serving diligently and efficiently but he received a letter dated 861998 from respondent No. 2 asking him to get his certificates of qualification checked.
The petitioner appeared before the Director, Public Instructions (Schools) and submitted the requisite certificates.
The petitioner states that Punjab Government has recognised the equivalence of various traditional examinations in Sanskrit with the general education set up.
Shiksha Shastri examination has been held equivalent to B.Ed.
and Punjabi University has further recognised the degree of Shastri as equivalent to BA Moreover, the Chairman of the Departmental Selection Committee (Teaching) Punjab in his letter dated 2641995 has further clarified that Shiksha Shastri is equivalent to B.Ed.
while discussing the case of Smt. Kusam Lata.
According to the petitioner he had requisite qualification for the post of Hindi Master and in these circumstances the issuance of show cause notice by respondent No. 2 vide its memo dated 991998 calling upon the petitioner as to why his services should not be terminated on account of non-fulfilment of the qualification is illegal and the order dated 2991998 (Annexure P19) passed by respondent No. 2 terminating services of the petitioner as Hindi Teacher is illegal, arbitrary, unconstitutional and void mainly on the ground that the petitioner did not fulfil the requisite qualification.
2.
After hearing Shri RS Dass, Advocate appearing on behalf of the petitioner, we are inclined to dispose of this writ petition at the motion stage itself.
3.
The premises which have been built up by the petitioner in the present petition is that he holds the requisite qualification for the post of Hindi Teacher and on account of equation, therefore, the order Annexure P19 is illegal.
Is it so, will be a point for adjudication for us.
4.
Prescribing the qualification for a particular post is the right of the employer and this exclusively falls within its domain.
To see further whether any particular candidate has fulfilled the requisite educational qualification or not will again fall within the purview and power of the employer.
Thus the employer is to lay down and interpret with regard to the educational qualification of a particular candidate who is desirous to seek public employment.
The above two principles are subject to the riders that the requisite qualification which may be laid down by the employer for a particular post should not be so harsh that it may become difficult for a desirous candidate to achieve it.
The employer cannot ask a desirous candidate to bring a sky.
The Civil Court or the High Court can again examine the legality if the action on the part of the authorities in seeking educational qualification of a particular candidate is arbitrary, vindictive or discriminatory etc. With this background we have to examine the case of the petitioner.
As per advertisement, the requisite qualifications for the post of Hindi Teacher were that the desirous candidate should have passed his BA with Hindi as elective subject and such candidate should have also passed Hindi as teaching subject in B.Ed.
These qualifications have been primarily fixed by the Government keeping in view the fact that the selected candidate is supposed to impart teaching in Hindi.
A good amount of knowledge, thus, is required on the part of successful candidate so that he may further dispense his knowledge to the students.
The record of this case shows that the petitioner is not fulfilling the requisite qualifications.
He simply wants to stretch qualification by analogy of equations.
Annexure P2 is the first certificate which shows that the petitioner obtained degree of Honours in Sanskrit from the Panjab University in the year 1994 in Third Division.
Ex. P.3 is other certificate issued by Educational Department of Chandigarh Administration certifying that the petitioner passed Shiksha Shastri (OT Sanskrit) Examination in the first Division.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner has also invited our attention to this certificate and it was urged that the petitioner has attained a sufficient knowledge in the methodology of teaching Sanskrit and Hindi; besides the petitioner is skilled in the teaching of Hindi and Sanskrit.
On this score, an effort was made by the learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner that the three years Shastri degree obtained by the petitioner from the Panjab University is to be treated as BA equivalent while the certificate of Shiksha Shastri (OT Sanskrit) from Chandigarh Administration is to be treated equivalent to B.Ed.
and in this manner, the petitioner possessed the requisite qualifications.
We are not convinced with the submissions raised by the learned Counsel for the petitioner.
In the impugned order Annexure P19, this aspect was taken note by the Director, Department of Education (Schools), Punjab who has come to a categorical conclusion that Shiksha Shastri (OT Sanskrit) is not equivalent to B.Ed.
The petitioner was supposed to pass B.Ed.
with Hindi as teaching subject and BA with Hindi as elective subject.
It is not the case of the petitioner that while coming to this conclusion, respondent No. 2 has acted vindictively or with mala fide intention or in a biased manner.
5.
The other point for determination by us would be whether before passing of the impugned order the principles of natural justice have been complied with or not.
Firstly, it was the condition of offer of appointment that the petitioner will have to satisfy the department about his educational qualifications.
The petitioner was called to do so.
When he submitted the requisite certificates those were found to be not in order as per prescribed qualification as a result of which show cause notice Annexure P17 was issued clearly stating that the petitioner did not fulfil the conditions of eligibility.
The petitioner made a representation.
His representation was duly considered and thereafter the impugned order Annex P19 was passed.
6.
The counsel for the petitioner has relied upon an order passed by the Supreme Court Annexure P11 dated 5111985 and a letter dated 2841995 issued by Chairman, Departmental Selection Committee (Teaching) Punjab addressed to the District Education Officer (Schools) Jalandhar and submitted that the Hon'ble Supreme Court has treated Shastri degree equivalent to BA Sanskrit and that Shiksha Shastri certificate has been equated with that of B.Ed.
Thus, the petitioner fulfils the requisite qualifications.
We are not convinced with this argument.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court has not laid down any law on this aspect.
The order was on a representation made by the counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents.
Even the letter Annexure P13 will not come to the rescue of the petitioner because of the specific conditions prescribed by the Government in the advertisement itself.
Since the petitioner was not fulfilling the requisite qualifications at the time of his selection, therefore, it was within the competency and domain of the Government to terminate the services of the petitioner and it has been rightly done, thus warranting no interference in the impugned order Annexure P19.
Consequently, we do not see any merit in this writ petition which is hereby dismissed in limine.
Costs are made easy.
Petition dismissed.