HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - This District Education Officer, Panchkula invited applications for admission to the Diploma in Education Course in the Government Teachers Training Institute, Dharla Morni Hills, through advertisement dated 20th September, 1997.
The petitioner, who was eligible to take the course in terms of the advertisement, applied within the stipulated time.
On the assessment of the inter-se merit of the various applicants, the petitioner, a member of the Scheduled Caste was shown at serial No. 11 in the merit list of that Category and as 10 seats had been reserved for the Scheduled Castes, he was shown at serial No. 1 in the waiting list.
The respondents, thereafter, filled in the seats offered in the Institute including the 10 reserved for the Scheduled Castes.
The petitioner has come to this Court claiming that Prem Singh, a candidate who was at serial No. 1 in the Scheduled Castes category, had obtained 71% marks in his merit assessment and by virtue of these marks, was entitled to admission against the General Category seat as well as the last candidate who had been admitted in the General Category had obtained 625%.
It is the petitioner's plea that Prem Singh aforesaid was to be counted as a candidate in the General Category as held by this Court in Jaskaran Singh and others v. State of Punjab and others, 1995(1) R.S.J.
510 : 1995(2) SCT 65 (P&H) and the seat that would resultantly fall vacant in the Scheduled Caste Category, would enable the petitioner to secure admission.
2.
On notice of motion, a written statement has been filed by respondents No. 1 to 3.
The fact that 10 seats had been earmarked for the Scheduled Caste candidates and that the petitioner was at serial No. 1 in the waiting list as averred by him, stand admitted.
It has also not been denied that Prem Singh who had secured 71% marks was meritorious enough to obtain admission against a General Category seat as well.
3.
Mr. SP Laler, the learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that the matter in issue was fully covered by the Division Bench judgment of this Court in Jaskaran Singh's case (super) and in the light of this precedent, the petitioner was entitled to admission.
4.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties I am of the opinion that this petition deserves to succeed.
In para 2 of the report, the question posed for determination was as to whether a candidate belonging to a reserved category who had secured more marks in the competitive entrance test than some of the General Category candidates, was entitled to seek admission against a seat in the General Category.
This question was considered by the Division Bench in the light of the various judgments of this High Court as also the Hon'ble Supereme Court and was answered by observing that if a member of a reserved category got selected in the open competitive field on the basis of his merit, such a candidate would not be counted against the reserved seat but would be treated as a General Category candidate.
It is the admitted position that Prem Singh, who stood at merit position No. 1 amongst the Scheduled Caste candidates, was entitled to secure admission as a General Category candidate as he had 71% marks to his credit.
The respondents were, therefore, in error in tabulating Prem Singh as one of the 10 Scheduled Castes candidates.
5.
The petitioner has also impleaded Prem Singh aforesaid as respondent No. 6 as also two other Scheduled Castes candidates as respondent Nos. 7 and 8.
It is true that as a result of the order in the writ petition, one of the candidate from the General Category could well be displaced, but in the light of the fact that the course in question is a petty one and the Institute is serving the youth of a far-flung and obscure rural area in the north-east corner of the State, I do not deem it proper to interfere with the selection that has already been made.
6.
This petition, is, accordingly, allowed and a direction is issued to the State of Haryana to treat Prem Singh respondent No. 6 as a General Category candidate and in the resultant vacancy, to grant admission to the petitioner.
It is further clarified that the petitioner's lectures will be counted from the date that he joins the course.
There will be no order as to costs.
Dasti order.
Petition allowed.