TS Doabia, J - The petitioners submit that they are entitled to the relief if totality of circumstances are taken into consideration and, in any case, they submit that equity is in their favour.
The circumstances under which this petition has come to be filed in this Court, be noticed.
The petitioners sought admission in the discipline of B.Music.
This is a five years course.
Some papers are compulsory, and some papers have been described as subsidiary.
Even in these papers, a candidate has to clear the examination.
One latitude shown in this regard for a candidate who is unable to clear the subsidiary subject in that he is allowed provisional admission in the next class.
This is true of the second year and also of the final class.
The relevant stipulation in this regard is contained in para 12 of the Regulations.
Copy of this is annexure A with the petition.
It be further seen that there is a further provision in this very Regulation.
This lays down that if a particular candidate has been given provisional admission to the second year class, or the final class, but is unable to clear the subsidiary subject, then his results of the second year or final examination shall be deemed to have been cancelled, and such a candidate would have to earn fresh eligibility to appear for the same.
Regulation 12 which is subject matter in this petition, be noticed.
It reads as under:  "12.
A candidate, who having earned his eligibility to appear in the subsidiary subjects does not appear in the examination or has failed in one or both of the subsidiary subjects at the end of the first year, shall be allowed to seek provisional admission to the 2nd year class and appear in the subsidiary subjects in the next subsequent bi-annual/supplementary and/or annual examination and if he is declared successful in the subsidiary subjects his provisional admission to the 2nd year class shall be regularised.
If the candidate is unable to clear the subsidiary subjects at the end of the 2nd year, he shall also be allowed to seek provisional admission to the Final class and appear in the subsidiary subjects in the next subsequent bi- annual/supplementary and/or annual examination and if declared/ successful in the subsidiary subjects his Provisional admission to the 2nd year class shall be regularised.
If the candidate is unable to clear the subsidiary subjects at the end of the 2nd year, he shall also be allowed to seek provisional admission to the Final class and appear in the subsidiary subjects in the next subsequent bi- annual/supplementary and/or annual examination and if he is declared successful in the subsidiary subjects his provisional admission to the Final class shall be regularised.
In case he is unable to clear the subsidiary subjects at the end of the Final year examination he shall be required to appear in these subjects as failure under statute 9(ii) but the provisional admission to the 2nd year class and Final class shall stand cancelled besides cancellation of his result of the Final examination and shall be required to earn fresh eligibility to appear in the same."
The learned counsel for he petitioners has also placed reliance on another Regulation.
This is 9(ii).
This provision is also being noticed.
This reads as under:  "9(ii) a candidate who has completed the prescribed course of lectures in the Final year but has been either unable to pass the examination shall be eligible to appear or complete the examination within a period of three years including the year in which he/she was either due to appear or having appeared but failed in the first instance."
The learned counsel for the petitioners submits that the two petitioners were unable to clear the subsidiary subjects.
They were granted provisional admission in the second year.
They were unable to clear even during the course of study of second year.
They were given provisional admission for final year also.
The further fact is that the petitioners submitted their admission forms for subsidiary papers.
This was done before the final examinations were held.
The result in the Final examination came to be declared on Ist of December, 1995.
The result of the subsidiary examination could not be declared.
On account of this factor, the University came to the conclusion, that the petitioners having not cleared the subsidiary examination in terms of Regulation 12 i.e. before the Final examination, therefore, they have to face the consequences enumerated in the last lines of Regulation 12.
It is this aspect of the matter which is being agitated in the present petition.
It be seen that the petitioners were allowed to appear in the subsidiary papers.
This appearance was before the final results were declared.
Had the results in the subsidiary papers been declared earlier to the declaration of result in the final papers, then the hurdle in the their way has come only because the result in the final examination came to be declared earlier.
I am of the opinion that the reasonable way of interpreting the Regulation would be that a candidate is well within his rights to avail of the chance before he appears in the final examination.
He can appear simultaneously also.
As indicated above, had the results of subsidiary examination been declared earlier, then the difficulty which is being faced by the petitioners would not have been faced by them.
In this situation, it would be apt to interpret the provision in a way which is beneficial to the students.
Taking into consideration the situation prevailing in the State and also the fact that there is place for ambiguity, the interpretation is being made in favour of the petitioners.
Independently of what has been stated above, it be seen that the petitioners submitted their examination forms and they were permitted to take part in the Examination.
There was no concealment on the part of petitioners; therefore, they may be well within their rights to take shelter of principle of equitable estoppel.
For this, reliance has been rightly placed on a decision of the Delhi High Court reported as Inder Parkash v. DC Delhi and others reported as AIR 1979 Delhi 87.
In the aforementioned case, the situation was similar.
The students were permitted to take part in the examination.
Thereafter, the respondent-authorities wanted to reverse the decision.
This was challenged successfully before the Delhi High Court.
There is another aspect of the matter.
It is well known principle of interpretation, that the meaning given to a particular provision should hold good in all eventualities.
If the interpretation put by the respondents is to be accepted then candidates whose result is declared earlier to the declaration of result of final examination would stand on a different and advantageous position as compared to the students whose results are declared late.
Thus an interpretation which depends on fortuitous circumstance as to when the result is declared cannot be accepted.
The interpretation as given above would hold good in all circumstances and is accepted as true intent and scope of the Regulation.
Another factor which has been pointed out by the learned counsel for the petitioners is that this ambiguity was noticed by the authorities.
A Committee came to be constituted.
The stand taken by the University is that this Committee was not constituted in terms of the Rules.
This matter is not being commented upon and is being left as it is.
As the petitioners had taken part in the subsidiary examination before the Final examination, and merely because the result was declared after the declaration of the result in the final papers, the petitioners cannot be put to disadvantage.
I am accordingly of the opinion, that the petition deserves to be allowed.
This petition is, accordingly, allowed.
The University will declare the results of the petitioners.
There would be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.