SS Parkar, J - Heard Mr. Anturkar for the petitioner and Mrs. Gokhale, AGP for the Respondent-State.
By this writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution the petitioner has challenged Rule 3(b) of the Rules for Selection to MBBS and BDS Course of 1997-98.
The said Rule provides as follows :-  "(b) The applicant must have passed the SSC or equivalent examination from Maharashtra:  Provided that for a child of any employee of Central Government or Government of India undertaking transfer to Maharashtra State and joined before the last date prescribed for submission of application and is in the service in jurisdiction of respective region, this condition would stand relaxed."
2.
The petitioner has passed her HSC Examination from Ruparel College in Bombay, Maharashtra.
The petitioner obtained 9235 per cent marks in Physics, Chemistry and Biology Group.
The petitioner's father was working in Baharain in Arabian Gulf where the petitioner was staying with him and, therefore, the petitioner had done her SSC equivalent examination viz. CBSE viz., Central Board of Secondary Education from Indian School in ISA town, Baharain.
She passed her SSC, equivalent examination in the year 1995 securing 928 per cent marks.
According to the petitioner ultimately with the aforesaid percentage of marks she was qualified to get admission for the Medical course in the State of Maharashtra.
However, as per the aforesaid Rule No. 3(b) which is framed by the Government of Maharashtra for the eligibility of applicants for admission in the Medical course, she cannot even apply for the said course although she was educationally qualified and had secured high percentage of marks which would enable her to obtain admission for the said course in the State of Maharashtra.
The petitioner has, therefore, challenged the above rule on two grounds viz. that it is the Medical Council of India which is empowered to frame Rules in that behalf and the Rules framed by the Medical Council of India prescribe only qualification that the candidate must have passed HSC Examination.
The second challenge is on the ground that the impugned Rule makes discrimination between the children whose parents are employed in the private service and the children whose parents are employed with the Central Government or the State Government.
3.
So far as the first contention is concerned that the Government cannot make rules for the purpose of admission to the Medical Course has no substance.
The Medical Council of India has prescribed the rule that in order to get admission to the Medical Course the candidate must have passed HSC examination.
That rule is not departed from by the Government.
All that the Government has laid down is that the applicant must have passed apart from the HSC examination, the SSC examination also from any school in the State of Maharashtra.
The said power of the Government to lay down, what is known as institutional preference, is permissible so long as there is no total reservation on the basis of residential or institutional preference.
As far back as in the year 1955 in the case of the DP Joshi v. State of Madhya Pradesh reported in AIR 1955 SC 334 the Apex Court had held that the preference in admissions on the basis of residence as well as the institutional preference is permissible so long as there is no total reservation on the basis of residential or institutional preference.
The said principle was reiterated by the Supreme Court in the case of Jagadish Saran (Dr.) v. Union of India reported in 1980(2) SCC 768.
Subsequently, in the case of Pradeep Jain (Dr.) v. Union of India reported in 1984(3) SCC 654, the Supreme Court held that the reservation to the extent of 70 per cent on the basis of residence and institutional preference was permissible leaving 30 per cent of the seats to be made available on all India basis.
Thereafter in the case of Dinesh Kumar v. Motilal Nehru Medical College reported in 1986(3) SCC 727, the Apex Court increased this percentage of reservation on the basis of residence and institutional preference to 85 per cent leaving only 15 per cent seats to be filled in on all India basis.
In this case the State Government has not made any Rule as regards qualification for admission to the Medical course but has only laid down the rules of preference in admissions on the basis of institution, which is as per the above citations, permitted.
The first contention of Mr. Anturkar, therefore, has no merit.
4.
So far as the second contention canvassed by Mr. Anturkar is concerned the same is also devoid of merit.
According to Mr. Anturkar the distinction made between the children of the employees of the Government and the children of parents who are employed in private service is not based on intelligible differential and smacks of discrimination.
He points out that by proviso to Rule 3(b) the rule that every applicant for admission to the Medical course must have passed SSC or equivalent examination from Maharashtra is relaxed so far as the children of employees of Central Government, State Government or the Government of India undertakings are concerned, while the children of parents who are employed in private service, like the petitioner, have to comply with the condition and pass the SSC Examination also from the State of Maharashtra.
He points out that the petitioner had to do her SSC from Baharain because her father was employed in a private service at Baharain and, therefore, she could not pass her SSC from the State of Maharashtra and, therefore, the said condition ought to be relaxed in her case also as it is done in the case of children of employees of Central and State Governments.
5.
We do not agree with submission made by Mr. Anturkar.
The case of the petitioner cannot be placed or treated on par with that of the children of Central Government and State Government employees.
So far as the employees of the Central Government and State Government are concerned, their services are transferable and they have no choice and no option in the matter.
The relaxation of the said condition is made in respect of the children of the Government employees because there is no choice in the matter for such a student and the condition of passing SSC examination from the State of Maharashtra would have worked hardship on the candidate.
The father of the petitioner had voluntarily taken employment outside not only of State of Maharashtra but outside India.
But so far as the Government employees are concerned, they have no choice or say in the matter of their transfers and because of the exigency of their service they have to accept their posting wherever they are sent.
In that view of the matter the case of the petitioner cannot be put on par with the Government employees.
The Supreme Court had carved out exception in the case of Meenakshi Malik v. University of Delhi, AIR 1989 SC 1568 : 1991(1) S.C.T.
192, in respect of Government employee on the ground that he was compelled to leave India by reason of the posting by the Government and there was no real choice in the matter.
On the other hand the father of the petitioner in this case had secured employment abroad voluntarily, of his own choice.
6.
Mr. Anturkar further contended that the object of the Rules is to select best students and the discrimination made between the Government employees and the private employees does not serve the object of selection of best students.
The said submission is also without any substance because the object of selection of best students cannot be said to have been deviated from simply because the relaxation of condition is made in favour of the children of the Government employees as they have got no choice in the matter, it cannot, therefore, be said that the rule about merit is given go-bye in case of children of Government employees.
7.
We, therefore, find no substance in the petition and hence the same is dismissed.
Rule is discharged.
There will be, however, no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.