GS Singhvi, J - This is a petition to quash Annexure-P10 under which the respondent No. 4 has started recovery from the pay of the petitioner towards the penal rent.
ordered to be charged by the authorities of the Punjab State Electricity Board (for short `the Board').
2.
The facts necessary for this decision are that the petitioner joined service as Junior Engineer in the Irrigation Department on 2771972.
In July, 1977, he was posed at Anandpur Hydel Project, Ganguwal.
The administrative control for maintenance and civil works of Anandpur Hydel Project Channel and Mukerian Hydel Project Channel was transferred by the Government of Punjab to the Punjab State Electricity Board vide order dated 671993.
The staff of Irrigation Department working on these projects was placed on deputation with the Board.
Accordingly, the services of the petitioner were also placed on deputation with the Board.
On 1211995, the petitioner was transferred from Maintenance Division, Ganguwal to Sarhala Maintenance Division, Patiala and was relieved immediately.
However, the charge of stores at Nakian and Kotla was not taken from him till 10101995 as is evident from Annexures P-4 to P-9.
Afterwards the respondent-Board decided to charge penal rent from the petitioner is lieu of the occupation of Government accommodation at Nangal.
Vide Annexure P10, the respondent No. 4 ordered recovery of the penal rent from his pay.
3.
The petitioner has challenged the levy of penal rent and recovery from his salary on the ground that the action of the respondents is violative of the rules framed by the Government of Punjab vide notification dated 25.2.1983 as well as Regulation 5.9 of the Punjab State Electricity Board Main Service Regulations, 1972, Volume-I, Part-I.
The respondent Nos. 1 to 4 have justified the charging of penal rent by alleging that the petitioner was transferred because he had become surplus but he did not vacate the Government accommodation on the concocted ground that the charge was not being taken from him.
4.
One of the contentions urged by Shri Rana is that the impugned levy is vitiated due to the violation of natural justice because no action oriented notice or opportunity of hearing was given to the petitioner.
Sh. Rana submitted that if notice had been given to the petitioner before the levy of penal interest, he would have shown that under the existing rules the respondents cannot levy penal interest at the rate of 15 times the normal rent and that he was not responsible for delay in handing over of the charge.
Shri JPS Sandhu could not show that the notice and hearing were given to the petitioner before the penal rent was levied on him but submitted that the action of the Board is consistent with the instructions issued vide memo No. 40278/41663/CE/N-133/Volume-III dated 1941995.
5.
We have thoughtfully considered the rival submissions and, in our opinion, the writ petition deserves to be allowed on the short ground that the impugned action of the respondents is violative of the principles of natural justice.
Whether the Board could levy penal interest which is 15 times of the normal rent under memo dated 1941995 is an issue which could not have been decided by the Board unilaterally and the issuance of notice to the petitioner before the levy of penal interest was absolutely imperative for the validity of the action of the respondents.
On being noticed by the competent authority, the petitioner could have shown that he was not to be blamed for the delay in transfer of the charge.
He could have pleaded that under the existing rules penal interest cannot be charged from him.
In the alternative he could have pleaded that the rate of penal interest should be reasonably reduced.
However, on account of the failure of the respondents to give appropriate notice to the petitioner, he has been deprived of this valuable right.
In other words, he has been condemned unheard and on this ground alone the impugned recovery is liable to be invalidated.
6.
The applicability of the principles of natural justice in cases where the action of the public authorities adversely affected the rights of the citizens is beyond doubt.
In State of Orissa v. Dr. (Miss) Binapani Dei, AIR 1967 SC 1269 and Sayeedur Rehman v. State of Bihar and others, AIR 1973 SC 239, the Apex Court has held that every public authority is duty bound to act in consonance with the principles of natural justice irrespective of the fact that the nature of power exercised by it is administrative.
In Dr. (Miss) Binapani Dei's case (supra), the apex Court laid down the following principles :-  "The rule that a party to whose prejudice an order is intended to be passed is entitled to a hearing applies alike to judicial tribunals and bodies of persons invested with authority to adjudicate upon matters involving civil consequences.
It is one of the fundamental rules of our constitutional set-up that every citizen is protected against exercise of arbitrary authority by the State or its officers.
Duty to act judicially would, therefore, arise from the very nature of the function intended to be performed; it need not be shown to be super-added.
If there is power to decide and determine to the prejudice of a person, duty to act judicially is implicit in the exercise of such power.
If the essentials of justice be ignored and an order to the prejudice of a person is made, the order is a nullity.
That is a basic concept of the rule of law and importance thereof transcends the significance of a decision in any particular case ..............................
It is true that some preliminary enquiry was made by Dr. S Mitra.
But the report of that Enquiry Officer was never disclosed to the first respondent.
Thereafter the first respondent was required to show cause why April 16, 1907, should not be accepted as the date of birth and without recording any evidence the order was passed.
We think that such an enquiry and decision were contrary to the basic concept of justice and cannot have any value.
It is true that the order is administrative in character, but even an administrative order which involves civil consequences, as already stated, must be made consistently with the rules of natural justice after informing the first respondent of the case of the State, the evidence in support thereof and after giving an opportunity to the first respondent of being heard and meeting or explaining the evidence.
No such steps were admittedly taken, the High Court was, in our judgment, right in setting aside the order of the State."
In Sayeedur Rehman's case (supra), the Court held as under :-  "This unwritten right of hearing is fundament to a just decision by any authority which decides controversial issue affecting the rights of the rival contestants.
This right has its roots in the notion of fair procedure.
It draws the attention of the party concerned to the imperative necessity of not overlooking the other side of the case before coming to its decision, for nothing is more likely to conduce to just and right decision than the practice of giving hearing to the affected parties.
The omission of express requirement of fair hearing in the rules or other source of power claimed for reconsidering an order is supplied by the rule of justice which is considered as an integral part of out judicial process which also governs quasi-judicial authorities when deciding controversial points affecting rights of parties."
Following the principles laid down by the Supreme Court, we allow the writ petition and quash Annexure P-10.
However, the respondents are given liberty to pass fresh order after giving notice and opportunity of hearing to the petitioner.
Petition allowed.