Swatanter Kumar, J - CM 22226 of 1997 is allowed.
Written statement filed on behalf of the legal representatives of the deceased workman is taken on record.
2.
With the consent of the parties, the matter is taken up for final hearing.
Learning counsel for the petitioner-Management submitted that this petition has become infructuous in view of the death of the workman.
3.
This position is not correct in law because by the impugned award the workman was granted reinstatement with continuity in service and also back wages to the extent of 60% of the amount payable to him in accordance with rules.
4.
After some arguments both the learned counsel appearing for the parties agreed that a consented order be passed in this petition.
The terms and conditions offered by the parties and agreed for disposal of this petition are as under :-  (i) The legal representatives of the deceased workman shall be paid 60% of the arrears of the wages within one year from today; (ii) the entire amount shall be paid in equal quarterly instalments; (iii) the amount shall be disbursed in the ratio.
50% to be paid to the mother which shall be used and utilised for herself and for the benefits of the minors while remaining 50% shall be kept in Fixed Deposit Receipt which shall be created by the Management itself in the name of the minor, being encashable on their attaining the majority or by orders of this Court in the eventuality of some exigency or emergency relating to the welfare of the minors; (iv) the amount of first instalment shall be paid in cash and the Fixed Deposit Receipt shall be created from the second and third instalments; and  (v) the management shall file details of compliance of this order.
Compliance of the order shall be by 7th November, 1997 before which date first instalment of so calculated amount shall also be paid.
5.
Counsel appearing for the respondent submits that he has no other claim against the Management on account of the deceased workman and arising out of the writ petition.
The terms and conditions which apparently seem to be just, fair and in the interest of the minors are accepted by the Court.
They shall form part of the order of the Court.
6.
The writ petition is finally disposed of.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition disposed of.