Mrs. Sarojnei Saksena, J - As the common question of law is involved in all these writ petitions Nos. 8581, 8582, 8579, 8613 and 14489 of 1989, they are being decided by this common judgment.
FACTS OF THE CASE  2.
The petitioners were enlisted as constables in the Haryana Armed Police/District Police in the month of August, 1982 and were posted in the IVth Battalion of the Haryana Armed Police at Madhuban.
In July, 1979 the respondents took a policy decision by which it was resolved that in future any recruitment of Constables would not be made direct in the Districts.
All the Constables would be recruited in the Armed Police and thereafter sent to the District in accordance with their seniority.
Thereby the respondents were transferring Constables from the Armed Police to the Districts from time to time on the basis of their seniority.
In May, 1988 there were a number of vacancies of Constables in the Districts.
The petitioners and certain other persons were the seniormost persons in the Armed Police and therefore, they were entitled to be sent to the Districts.
However, in the month of May, 1988, the respondents transferred 203 Constables to the District who were junior to the petitioners, but the petitioners who were senior to those 203 persons were illegally ignored.
Some Constables who were also illegally ignored, filed Civil Writ Petition No. 4081 of 1988 on 1351988 for redressal of their grievances.
This Writ petition was allowed by the Division Bench vide order dated 15111988 (Annexure P-1).
The petitioners had no knowledge or concern with the proceedings initiated by those Constables in the High Court, but they were wrongly and incorrectly implicated and punished for the alleged offence which they never committed.
The petitioners were asked by the Commandant to tell him regarding the proceedings initiated by some employees in the High Court.
As they had no knowledge, they expressed their inability to give any such information whereupon the Commandant became annoyed and they were dismissed from service vide order annexure P-2 in the month of May, 1988 after dispensing with enquiry under Rule 1624 (ix) (b) of the Punjab Police Rules and Article 311 (2) (b) of the Constitution.
Petitioners were dismissed from service because it was alleged that they had links with the anti-social elements, who were bent upon disturbing the peace of the Haryana Armed Police Complex.
However, they had adspted a militant attitude towards their seniors and were threatening them with dire consequences.
3.
The petitioners submitted appeal (Annexure P-3), which was dismissed vide order annexure P-4, which is non-speaking.
Petitioners submitted revision under Rule 1632 of the Punjab Police Rules, which was also dismissed by respondent No. 2 vide order Annexure P-6 and conveyed to the petitioners (Revision of Petitioner Jeet Ram is not yet decided).
These orders are wholly illegal, arbitrary, mala fide and have been passed in blatant disregard to the Rules and of principles of natural justice and are, therefore, hit by the vice of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
The Petitioners prayed that these orders be quashed, respondents be directed to reinstate the petitioners in service with all consequential benefits including the seniority, arrears of pay with interest at the rate of 12 per cent.
4.
Respondents in their written statements inter alia pleaded that the different transfer policies have been adopted by the department from time to time keeping in view the administrative exigency.
In 1984 it was decided that the police personnel recruited in HAP, will remain in HAP and those who are recruited in the Districts, will remain in Districts.
In July, 1988 it was decided that the constables from HAP, would be transferred to Districts on the basis of their seniority.
It is also admitted that in May, 1988, 203 Constables were transferred from HAP to their Districts.
As per the transfer policy prevailing at that time, only those Constables who were recruited in the Districts were to be transferred to the Districts and those constables who were recruited in the HAP, were to remain in HAP.
As the petitioners were recruited exclusively for HAP, they were not transferred.
No constable junior to the petitioners, who was exclusively recruited for HAP was transferred to the District.
It is also averred that no government employee can claim a particular posting as a matter of right unless it has resulted in some pecuniary loss to him.
Civil Writ Petition No. 4091 of 1988 was filed by Ex- constable Surinder Kumar which was dismissed on 15111988 but at that time the petitioners were not in service.
As the petitioners were bent upon disturbing the peace in Haryana Armed Police Complex through their nefarious activities, they have adopted a militant posture towards their seniors and they had constantly threatened with dire consequences and instigated other employees of their rank to disobey the lawful orders of the authority and thus they proved themselves desperate and dangerous employees.
The petitioners contributed to the creation of a situation in which a security force itself became a security risk.
It is denied that the annexures P-2 and P-6 are illegal, invalid, arbitrary or are hit by Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
The respondents had recorded reasons for dispensing with the enquiry separately.
Under those prevailing circumstances, it was not possible to hold a regular enquiry against the petitioners.
Hence, they were dismissed after dispensing with enquiry under Rule 1624 (ix) (b) of the Punjab Police Rules and Article 311 (2) (b) of the Constitution of India.
5.
Petitioners' learned counsel submitted that in Civil Writ Petition No. 8580 Ranbir Singh v. State of Haryana and others, identical matter was considered and the writ petition was allowed on the basis of the judgment given in Civil Writ Petition No. 6011 of 1996 Satyawan Singh v. State of Haryana and others decided on 17121996.
Thereby he submitted that these writ petitions be also allowed accordingly.
6.
The learned Deputy Advocate General, Haryana, conceded that these petitions are covered by the aforementioned judgments.
7.
As the counsel for the parties agree that the case of the petitioners is squarely covered in their favour by the Division Bench judgments of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 6011 of 1996, Constable Satyawan Singh v. State of Haryana and others, decided on 17121996 as well as by the decision rendered in Civil Writ Petition No. 8580 of 1989, Ranbir Singh v. State of Haryana and others, decided on 1431997 wherein also the petitioners were dismissed from service without conducting an enquiry as they were indulging in trade union activities.
8.
Consequently, these petitions are allowed in the same terms and the impugned orders, Annexures P-2, P-4 and P-6 are quashed.
Petitioners will be entitled to all consequential benefits.
It will, however, be open to the respondents to proceed against the petitioners in accordance with law.