Dr. (Mrs.) Sarojnei Saksena, J - The petitioner has claimed appointment on compassionate grounds in the Haryana State Electricity Board in accordance with the instructions of the Haryana Government dated November 23, 1992 (Annexure P-1) as adopted by the respondent-Board on April 26, 1993.
2.
The facts of the case as stated in the petition, briefly, are that the petitioner's father, Chetan Singh, aged about 55 years, was working as an Assistant Foreman in East Sub Division, Haryana State Electricity Board, Ambala City.
On July 1, 1993, he fell down from an electric pole as a result of breakage of rope and suffered serious injuries.
He was medically treated in General Hospital, Ambala City and after long treatment of his illness, he developed cancer.
He remained on long leave because of his illness.
He was referred to P.G.I., Chandigarh for treatment.
Vide application dated August 20, 1994 (Annexure P-2) addressed to respondent-2, Chief Engineer, `OP' Z-1, Haryana State Electricity Board, Panchkula, he sought his retirement on medical grounds.
Vide order dated March 20, 1995 Annexure P-3, passed by respondent No. 2 he was retired with effect from August 5, 1994, on the basis of the certificate issued by the Medical Board on August 5, 1994 (Annexure P- 4).
3.
Petitioner's father expired on April 24, 1995.
During his life-time, he made a request to the respondents vide his application dated April 20, 1994 (Annexure P-5) that his son-Gurdeep Singh (petitioner), who is a Matriculate, be given employment on compassionate ground in view of the Haryana Government's instructions dated 23111992 as adopted by the respondent-Board on 2641993.
Executive Engineer, Operation Division, HSEB, Ambala City, recommended this application vide his letter dated July 7, 1994 (Annexure P-6) to the Chief Medical Officer, Ambala, for getting the petitioner's father examined from Medical Board so that his prayer for appointment of his son on compassionate grounds may be considered in view of the Haryana Government's policy dated 23111992 (Annexure P-1).
Accordingly, petitioner's father was examined by the Medical Board on August 5, 1994.
The Medical Board vide Annexure P-4 opined that Chetan Singh was completely and permanently incapacitated for further service of any kind in the Department to which he belonged.
On this, Chief Engineer, `OP' Z-1, HSEB, Panckhula (respondent No. 2) wrote to the Additional Secretary, HSEB, Panchkula, vide letter dated 5101995 (Annexure P-7) to consider the application of Chetan Singh, who retired on August 5, 1994 and expired on April 24, 1995, for appointment of his son on compassionate grounds, but this prayer was declined by the respondent-Board vide letter dated 1271996 (Annexure P-8) without assigning any reasons.
4.
Haryana Government revised its ex gratia employment scheme, Annexure P-1, by issuing another policy, Annexure P-9, dated August 31, 1995, which was adopted by the respondent-Board on November 13, 1995 vide Annexure P-10.
5.
Petitioner's mother sent another application on August 2, 1996, Annexure P-11, for giving appointment to her son (petitioner) on compassionate grounds.
The petitioner also submitted such an application dated October 2, 1996, Annexure P-12, but no order was passed by the respondent thereon.
6.
The petitioner's contention is that in the revised ex gratia appointment policy, Annexure P-9, there is a clause that if any Government employee is declared medically unfit/blind/incapacitated by a special medical board and retired on or before attaining the age of 55 years in the case of Class I, II, III officers/officials and 57 years in case of Class IV employees, the facility of compassionate employment would be available; but if he is declared incapacitated/blind after 55 years of age in the case of group A, B, C, employees and after 57 years in the case of group D employees, he will not be entitled to this facility.
Petitioner's contention is that this condition of age prescribed in the new ex gratia appointment policy has no nexus with the object sought to be achieved; hence, paragraph 5 of the impugned instructions, Annexure P-9, is contrary to the Punjab Civil Services Rules as applicable to Haryana State and is liable to be quashed being contrary to the mandatory provisions of these Rules.
Under Rule 326 of these Rules, a Government employee other than a Class IV Government employee attains the age of superannuation at the age of 58 years and a Government employee in Class-IV attains the age of superannuation at the age of 60 years.
Hence the petitioner prays that the respondents be directed to appoint him under the ex gratia employment scheme, Annexure P-1, being son of disabled Chetan Singh.
It is also submitted that the fresh instructions, Annexure P-9, cannot be made applicable retrospectively and clause 5 thereof has no nexus with the object sought to be achieved except the blatant discrimination amongst such claimants.
Petitioner also averred that other persons similarly situated were granted the relief of compassionate employment under the old ex gratia employment policy, Annexure P-1, while this relief was not granted to the petitioner discriminately.
7.
Respondent No. 2 in its written statement admitted that Chetan Singh was an employee of the Haryana State Electricity Board; he met with an accident and suffered injuries; his medical board was held, which declared him incapacitated to render any service to the respondent-Board and on that basis, he was retired prematurely.
Later on, he died.
But, according to respondent No. 1, the petitioner's father attained the age of 55 years on July 1, 1993, but he was retired from service on March 20, 1995 with effect from August 5, 1994, Respondent No. 2 has further averred that the petitioner's claim for compassionate employment was rightly declined by the respondent-Board as by the time his application came for consideration, the new policy Annexure P-9, was made applicable and since the petitioner's case was not squarely covered under this new policy, his prayer was declined.
8.
Petitioner's learned counsel relying on Rajesh Chander Sharma v. The State of Punjab, 1992(2) R.S.J.
737 : 1992(3) SCT 264, Tarun Chakraborty v. State of West Bengal, 1996(2) Services Cases Today 799, Smt. Sushma Gosain and others v. Union of India and others, A.I.R. 1989 SC 1979, Surinder Singh v. State of Haryana, 1996(1) SCT 767 : 1996(2) S.L.R.
230, and judgment given in Civil Writ Petition No. 17633 of 1995 (Surinder Singh v. State of Haryana and others) on December 20, 1996, by a Single Bench of this Court, contended that since the petitioner's father had submitted application seeking appointment of his son (petitioner) when old ex gratia employment policy, Annexure P-1, was in vogue and the respondent-Board after obtaining opinion of the special medical board that the petitioner's father was totally incapacitated from rendering any service to the Board retired him and the petitioner's case for appointment on compassionate grounds was recommended by the officers of the respondent-Board vide their letters, Annexures P-6 and P-7, hence his father's application, annexure P-5, could not have been rejected under the amended policy, Annexure P-9.
The rejection order, Annexure P-8, was passed on July 12, 1996, whereas the new policy, Annexure P-9, was implemented with effect from August 31, 1995.
The petitioner's case was required to be decided under the old policy, Annexure P-1.
In the old policy there was no condition that if a Class I, II or III Government servant retired due to his becoming blind, incapacitated from rendering any service to the Department on or after attaining the age of 55 years, then the facility of compassionate employment to his/her dependent will not be available.
This new clause has been incorporated in the new policy, Annexure P-9.
This new condition in the new policy is arbitrary and discriminatory as Government employees other then Class IV employees retire at the age of 58 years and Class IV employees retire at the age of 60 years.
If before the date of attaining this age, a Government employee suffers any such disability, then he would not be entitled to get relief of this policy.
Hence, this condition in the new policy, Annexure P-9, has no nexus with the object for which this policy is formulated.
9.
The respondents' learned counsel contended that petitioner's father's application, Annexure P-5, was under consideration and in the meantime, new policy Annexure P-9, was issued modifying the earlier policy Annexure P-1.
Therefore, application, Annexure P-5, was to be considered in the light of the directions given in the new policy, Annexure P-9, When petitioner's father, Chetan Singh retired, he was more than 55 years of age; therefore, his son (petitioner) had no legal right to seek compassionate employment under the new policy, Annexure P-9.
Hence, Annexure P-8, was rightly passed and the prayer was declined.
10.
The respondents' learned counsel also submitted that Clause 5 of the new policy, Annexure P-9, has a rationale behind it.
If a Government employee of Class I, II or III service retired at the age of 55 years, he is entitled to get full pension and other retrial benefits.
Therefore, his family does not face any financial crisis.
Hence the condition of age limit was incorporated in the new policy, Annexure P-9.
11.
Only two points arise for consideration in this writ petition :(1) Whether application, Annexure P-5, was required to be decided in terms of the old ex gratia employment policy, annexure P-1, or in terms of the new policy, Annexure P-9; and (ii) whether clause (5) of the new policy, Annexure P-9, is arbitrary and discriminatory and has no nexus with the object for which this policy is formulated ?
12.
So far as the first point is concerned, in Smt. Sushma Gosain's case (supra), the Apex Court has held :-  "....... that in all claims for appointment on compassionate grounds, there should not be any delay in appointment.
The purpose of providing appointment on compassionate ground is to mitigate the hardship due to death of the bread earner in the family.
Such appointment should, therefore, be provided immediately to redeem the family in distress.
It is improper to keep such case pending for years.
It there is no suitable post for appointment, supernumerary post should be created to accommodate the applicant."
13.
A single Bench of this court in Rajesh Chander Sharma's case (supra) has also considered this aspect and held that case of the petitioner for compassionate appointment has to be decided according to the instructions which were in force on the date when he had submitted the application.
14.
In Tarun Chakraborty's case (supra), a Single Bench of the Calcutta High Court has held that dependent of the deceased employee was entitled to compassionate appointment on the date of death of the deceased employee.
Policy of compassionate appointment if changed later on in one time financial benefit in lieu of employment, the dependent has a legal right to get appointment as per the existing policy at the time of death of the deceased employee.
If there is a policy decision in force for the benefit of the employees, deviation or departure from such policy decision attracts the wrath of Article 14 of the Constitution.
Executive instructions unless issued for the benefit of the employees cannot be given retrospective effect.
15.
Surinder Singh's case (supra) reported in 1996(2) S.L.R.
230 : 1996(1) SCT 767, was decided by a Division Bench of this Court.
In that case also, petitioner had applied for appointment on compassionate ground in view of the ex gratia scheme.
He was considered eligible to the appointment as dependent of the deceased employee and was placed at serial No. 463 in the priority list as on May 9, 1994.
A post of Chowkidar-cum-Mali was available for his appointment under the ex gratia scheme, but on account of laxity on the part of the concerned authorities, no decision could be taken till the issuance of instructions dated May 8, 1995, providing that a married dependent of deceased employee would not be entitled to compassionate appointment.
The Division Bench held that the instructions issued on May 8, 1995 could not be applied retrospectively so as to prejudicially affect the right of the petitioner to be considered for appointment on compassionate grounds, particularly when the post was available for him before the issuance of the new instructions.
16.
In the present case, it is obvious that the petitioner's father Chetan Singh met with an accident during the course of the employment on July 1, 1993, which resulted in seriously injuring him and later on because of these injuries he was incapacitated to render any service to the respondent- Board, On April 20, 1994, he made application (Annexure P-5) to the Sub- Divisional Officer, Operation Sub Division (East), HSEB, Ambala City, that due to his incurable disease he wants retirement on medical grounds; after his retirement there will be no source of income in his family; therefore, he requested that his son-Gurdeep Singh (petitioner) may be given employment in the Haryana State Electricity Board on compassionate grounds in view of Haryana Government's instructions dated 23111992 adopted by the HSEB on 2641993.
In pursuance of letter dated 771994 (Annexure P-6) when this application was under consideration, Chetan Singh was medically examined by a special medical board constituted by the Chief Medical Officer, Ambala, on August 5, 1994, and vide order dated March 20, 1995 (Annexure P-3) passed by respondent No. 2, Chetan Singh was retired from service with effect from August 5, 1994.
Chetan Singh's application, Annexure P-5, was considered and recommended by the Chief Engineer, `OP' Z-1, Panchkula, vide letter dated 5101995 (Annexure P-7), but this prayer was declined by the respondent-Board vide order dated July 12, 1996 (Annexure P-8).
In the letter, Annexure P-8, there is no reference to the new policy, annexure P-9.
It is completely a non-speaking order showing total non-application of mind.
17.
In view of the aforementioned authorities, Chetan Singh's application for appointment of his son (petitioner) on compassionate grounds submitted on April 20, 1994, should have been considered immediately in compliance of the Government's instructions, Annexure P-1.
In compliance of letter, Annexure P- 6, he was examined by the medical board on August 5, 1994, and on having been declared invalid/disabled to perform duties, he was retired from service with effect from August 5, 1994, vide order dated March 20, 1995 (Annexure P-3), but till then, his application (Annexure P-5) was not decided by the officers/officials of the respondent-Board.
If Chetan Singh's application had been considered by the officials of the respondent-Board in view of the recommendatory letter (Annexure P-7), the petitioner would have been appointed by the respondent-Board on compassionate grounds in pursuance of the policy (Annexure P-1).
Hence, in my considered view, the application (Annexure P-5) filed by the petitioner's father before issuance of the new ex gratia employment policy, Annexure P-9, was required to be considered under the old policy (Annexure P-1).
For deciding this application, the modified policy (Annexure P-9) cannot be applied retrospectively.
18.
Since the writ petition is being allowed while deciding point No. 1, it is not necessary to decide point No. 2.
19.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is allowed, the respondents are directed to consider the petitioner's case for his appointment on compassionate grounds and pass a speaking order within two months from the date of submission of certified copy of this order.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.