Dr. Sarojnei Saksena, J - Mr Malik submits that this writ petition is squarely covered by the judgment rendered in writ petition No. 720 of 1994, Annexure P5, decided on 2771994 by the Division Bench of this High Court.
The impugned order, Annexure P4 reads as under :  ``In view of the above finding, I found the reply of Sh. Mohinder Singh quite unsatisfactory, it stands established that benefit on one increment of 2479 under Rule 71 ibid was only admissible to regular employee.
As Sh. Mohinder Singh JBT Teacher working on ad hoc basis on 2479 the benefit of one increment wrongly was given to him and his pay was wrongly fixed and Rs. 525/- P.M. Keeping in view all aspects of the matter, I order that benefit of one increment wrongly granted to him with effect from 2479 should be withdrawn and his pay should be fixed at Rs. 510/- on 2479.
The excess amount drawn by him on account of wrong fixation of pay should be recovered from him in ten equal instalments.''
In this writ petition similar order was passed in connection with other petitioners.
The petitioners are claiming that these orders of recovery and non-payment of additional increments to them under rule 71, referred to above, be quashed and the respondents be directed not to recover the benefits of fixation of salary granted to them under Rule 7 of the Haryana Civil Services (Revised Scale of Pay) Rules, 1980.
2.
The State-respondent passed the impugned orders holding that ad hoc mployees are not entitled to get the benefit of additional increment under the aforesaid Rule, but in the case of Dharamvir Garg v. State of Haryana and others, (Writ Petition No. 720 of 1994) Annexure P5, the High Court held as under :-  ``On notice of motion having been issued, reply has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
After hearing counsel for the parties, we are of the view that the present case is fully covered by the decision of this Court in Baldev Raj Sharma v. State of Punjab, 1991(2) Recent Services Judgments 172 : 1991(3) SCT 565(P&H).
In this case it was held that the services spent on ad hoc and regular basis were equated work-wise and no discrimination could be in the matter of pay.
Thus in the present case also the benefit of grant of additional increment already given to the petitioner considering his ad hoc service, cannot be withdrawn while fixing his pay under the New Rules which came into force as on January 1, 1986.
While fixing the pay, option of the petitioner, Annexure P4 given under the Rules, was also to be taken into consideration.
For the reasons recorded above, both the writ petitions are allowed with the direction to the respondents to allow the benefit of additional increment granted taking into consideration the ad hoc service and to refix the pay under the New Rules accordingly.
3.
Thus, this writ petition is also decided in the same terms.
Annexure P4 and similar orders passed with regard to other petitioners are hereby quashed.
Petitioners are also held entitled for re-fixation of pay in accordance with these orders within three months of the communication of this order.