Usha Mehra, J - Petitioner was appointed as Driver in the Delhi Transport Corporation (in short DTC) in August, 1973.
Before appointment the petitioner was medically examined.
The Medical Board declared him fit to drive the DTC bus.
When the Medical examination of the petitioner took place the factum of his two fingers of right hand being slightly short was known to the medical experts.
In spite of that the Medical Board declared him fit to drive the bus.
In March, 1988 on account of general strike by the employees of the DTC, services of the petitioner were terminated as he participated in the general strike.
In November 1989 alongwith other employees the petitioner was also taken back in service, but was not allowed to perform duties.
Subsequent thereto from February, 1990 petitioner was allotted duties.
He was paid salary for about 80 days.
At the same time the petitioner was asked to appear before a Medical Board for his re-medical examination.
In fact during the period from March, 1988 to November, 1989 there was no further deformity caused to his hand but in spite of the same the DTC Medical Board declared him medically unfit to drive the DTC bus not for any other reason but due to his right hand fingers being slightly short, though this fact was known to the DTC ever since his appointment as Driver in 1973.
He was also not found fit because of these two short fingers for the job of a peon.
As a result of the re-medical Board conducted by the DTC in 1990 petitioner was prematurely retired.
He felt aggrieved by this act of the respondent.
2.
The short point for consideration is whether respondent could prematurely retire the petitioner on the basis of two fingers of his right hand being slightly short, particularly when this fact was noticed by the Medical Board which declared him fit for Driver's job in 1973.
The admitted facts as pointed out above clearly show that at the time of entering into service the petitioner was medically examined by a DTC Medical Board.
That Medical Board noticed that two right hand fingers of the petitioner were slightly short, yet he was declared medically fit to drive a DTC Bus.
This happened in 1973.
Thereafter, the petitioner had been driving DTC buses.
It is also not disputed by the respondent that on its record there is nothing against the petitioner about his driving capability.
His premature retirement is only on the ground that the re-medical Board constituted by the DTC declared him unfit.
This report was of 1991.
His conduct has otherwise been good.
This was so reported by the respondent before this Court on 16th November, 1993.
Petitioner has never been involved in any accident ever since 1973.
Petitioner has been continuously and effectively performing his duties of a driver.
His performance and duties as Driver have been free from any blemish.
He has never been accused of causing any accident or loss to DTC.
It was in this background that the petitioner alleged that the re-medical Board was convened by the respondent to procure a report against him.
In order to resolve the controversy and to obtain correct position regarding the capability of the petitioner to drive a DTC bus, directions were given by this Court to the Depot Manager, to refer the petitioner for medical examination by a Medical Board to be constituted by LNJP Hospital.
The Depot Manager of the respondent directed the petitioner to appear before the Board convened by the LNJP Hospital.
At the time of referring the petitioner for re-medical examination by LNJP Hospital, the Depot Manager furnished the following information vide his letter dated 18th December, 1996 which is reproduced as under :-  DTC OKHLA DEPOT-I : NEW DELHI  No OD-I/PFC-Dr./96/3539 Dated 18.12.1996  The Addl.
MS  LN Hospital,  New Delhi-110002.
Sub : Re-Medical of Sh. Ram Pal, Ex-Driver B.No.
4860 of DTC, OD-I, New Delhi.
Sir,  Kindly refer to this office letter Nos. 2942, 3117 & 3357 dated 7.10.96, 25101996 & 21111996 respectively vide which it has been requested to fix up a date for re-medical examination in respect of the above ex-employee.
On 21111996 the matter was discussed in detail with Sh. Rajiv, D/Asstt.
to the Medical Board, LN Hospital, New Delhi.
The required information as per discussion held is as under :-  1.
Date of appointment of the ex-employee in DTC 5th August, 1973 2.
Medical report of DTC Medical Board at the time of appointment in DTC Photocopy of the Medical report is enclosed.
3.
Reason of re-medical Examination As per orders of the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi he is to be medically re-examined by the Govt. Hospital.
(Copy of the Court's order is enclosed.
4.
Reason for IInd Medical Examination He was dismissed alleged to have taken part in the strike and taken back in the service on 26101989.
He was again directed to report to the Medical Board for re-medical check-up as per order of our Corporate office.
5.
Standard of medical examination in accordance with para VII(h) for physical fitness.
Photocopy is enclosed.
It is further mentioned here that the ex-employee is being directed to report to your good self for re-medical examination in Room Nos. 103, 104 and 105, LN Hospital, New Delhi on any working day (Monday to Friday) between 10 A.M. to 5 PM  Encl : As above.
Yours faithfully, Sd/- (DK SHUKLA) Depot Manager Okhla Depot-I 3.
A perusal of this letter shows that at the time of re-examination of the petitioner by the Medical Board of LNJP Hospital, the Depot Manager furnished photocopy of a medical report of the DTC Medical Board who examined him at the time of his entering into the service in 1973.
Beside that the Depot Manager also furnished the standard of medical examination required to be conducted by the LNJP Hospital on the petitioner and the rules particularly para VII(h) regarding as to how the physical fitness had to be judged by medically examining the petitioner.
This can be seen from the reading of paras 2 and 5 of the letter quoted above.
It was on the basis of DTC's requirement that the Medical Board of LNJP Hospital examined the petitioner.
The perusal of the report by the Medical Board of LNJP Hospital shows that it found the petitioner fit to drive the DTC bus, meaning thereby that the petitioner was found physically fit according to the medical fitness required under para VII(h) of the DTC Rules.
The said report of the Medical Board of the LNJP Hospital dated 16th January, 1997 has been placed on record.
It shows that petitioner was found fit in all respects to drive a vehicle.
Medical experts of LNJP Hospital found that due to the amputated distal and middle phalanges of the ring and middle fingers of the right hand of the petitioner could not be a deformity which could prevent the petitioner from driving a bus.
Medical Board of the LNJP Hospital further found that the grip and release of the petitioner's hand were quite strong.
It could adequately perform the job.
His grip strength is good for small and large objects.
Keeping these factors in view, the Medical Board of LNJP Hospital found him fit to drive a DTC bus.
The detailed reasoning of the Medical Board has also been placed on record.
4.
In view of the above facts, it can safely be concluded that the petitioner who had been driving the DTC buses even since 1973 without accident and loss to the DTC and without any casualty and who has been declared medically fit by an independent medical board of the well reputed Government Hospital could not have been prematurely retired on the ground of being medically unfit.
In this view of the matter, the premature retirement of the petitioner ordered by the DTC vide the impugned order is accordingly set aside.
Rule is made absolute.
Directions are accordingly given to the respondent to take back the petitioner in service.