NK Sodhi, J - Petitioner was engaged in August, 1982 as an Apprentice Draftsman under the Apprenticeship Act, 1961 for training for 3 years in the Public Works Department (B&R Branch), Haryana.
One of the conditions of apprenticeship was that there shall be no obligation on the part of the department to provide him employment after the expiry of the training period.
It is not in dispute that the petitioner has undergone the training from 1681982 to 15.8.1985.
After completion of his training he represented to the Engineer-in-Chief in the year 1985 that he be employed as a Draftsman in the department.
His claim for appointment was not accepted as according to the department there were no rules or instructions providing for an apprentice to be appointed as a Draftsman.
He kept representing thereafter.
It was in the year 1993 that he filed the present petition under Article 226 of the Constitution for a direction to the respondents to appoint him as Draftsman in the department.
It is alleged that some posts of Draftsman are lying vacant and that the petitioner could be appointed against one of these posts.
2.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondents 1 and 2 it is pleaded that the petitioner has no right to seek employment with the department as according to the terms of his apprenticeship there was no obligation on the part of the department to give him employment on the completion of his training.
3.
I have heard counsel for the parties.
4.
The argument of Mr. SK Sud, learned counsel for the petitioner is that one Surinder Singh who also similarly completed his apprenticeship in the Irrigation Department was offered the post of Draftsman (Civil) on which post he is presently working and, therefore, the petitioner who had acquired higher merit than the said Surinder Singh should have been given employment prior to the said Surinder Singh.
He has also referred to the cases of some other apprentices who too had higher merit than Surinder Singh and were given employment under the orders issued by this Court in Civil Writ Petition 15045 of 1992.
The learned counsel has also referred to another decision of this Court in Jatinder Kumar Juneja v. State of Haryana and another, Civil Writ Petition 2576 of 1994 decided on 1951994.
I have gone through the Division Bench judgments of this Court in Civil Writ Petition 15045 of 1992 and also in Jatinder Kumar Juneja's case (supra).
It has been observed by the learned Judges that ordinarily a person who has undergone apprenticeship training would not be entitled as a matter of right to be obsorbed by the employer but when the employer happens to be the State, it is obligatory that before any absorption or employment is made, it should be strictly in accordance with merit.
In Jatinder Kumar Juneja's case (supra) the learned Judges further observed that the training imparted to the apprentices throughout the State is same and the object thereof is common and, therefore, the apprentices trained with the State in its various wings form one class.
This being so, the petitioner who did his apprenticeship along with Surinder Singh and others has admittedly got a higher merit inasmuch as he secured 451 marks out of 580 in the diploma whereas Surinder Singh obtained only 397.
Surinder Singh has already been employed as a Draftsman in the Irrigation Department.
It is just a coincidence that Surinder Singh was appointed an apprentice in the Irrigation Department and the petitioner in the B&R department.
This fortuitous circumstance cannot deprive the petitioner of his right to employment when others who took the training with him and had lower merit have been employed by the State.
The case of the petitioner, in my opinion, is squarely covered in his favour by the aforesaid Division Bench judgments of this Court and I am bound by them.
It may be mentioned that the Government of India, Ministry of Labour and Rehabilitation as per its letter dated 2331983 recommended that 50% of the total vacancies in the establishments should be got converted as direct recruitment vacancies and efforts should be made to ensure that all apprentices are absorbed in the industries subject to a minimum of 50% of the direct recruitment vacancies being provided to the apprentices.
5.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed and the respondents are directed to give employment to the petitioner as a Draftsman (Civil) in any department.
It will, however, be open to the respondents to employ the petitioner on any other post commensurate with his training.
No costs.