RL Anand, J - The Kular Co-operative Agricultural Society Ltd, Kular, Post Office Chaikiman, Tehsil Jagraon, District Ludhiana (hereinafter called Society) through its Vice President Shri Jagga Singh has filed the present Civil Writ Petition under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India against the Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Punjab, Chandigarh, Assistant Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Jagraon and Shri Chamkaur Singh son of Tehal Singh, respondents No. 1 to 3 respectively for the issuance of an appropriate writ, order or direction for setting aside the order dated 2811980 passed by the Assistant Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Jagraon, Annexure P-3 and it has been pleaded by the Society that it is registered under the provisions of the Punjab Cooperative Societies Act, 1961 and is carrying on business and has its office in village Kular, Tehsil Jagraon, district Ludhiana.
Vide resolution dated 21.2.1980, the Society has authorised its Vice President Shri Jagga Singh to file the present writ petition in the High Court.
2.
It is alleged that respondent No. 3 Chamkaur Singh was appointed by the Managing Committee of the Society on 24101978 as Cashier of the society and vide resolution dated 2661979 the services of respondent No. 3 were terminated by the Society as per resolution Annexure P-1 dated 2661979.
Against the said orders, respondent No. 3 filed an appeal on 28.6.1979 before the Assistant Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Jagraon vide Annexure P-2 and the appeal was accepted vide order dated 2811980 by the Assistant Registrar, Co-operative Societies and respondent No. 3 was reinstated into service.
The impugned order is Annexure P-3.
The petitioner Society has challenged the impugned order Annexure P-3 on the ground that it was passed by the Assistant Registrar, Cooperative Societies without jurisdiction and he had no authority to pass such orders either under the provisions of Punjab Cooperative Societies Act or under the Punjab Cooperative Societies Rules or under the Service Rules framed by the Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Punjab known as Punjab State Cooperative Agricultural Services Societies Service Rules, 1979.
It is also averred that the services of respondent No. 3 were terminated on 2661979.
Thereafter on 29.8.1979 Model Bye-Laws for the petitioner Society were registered by the Assistant Registrar, Cooperative Societies and in the Model Bye-laws there is a provision being Bye-laws No. 38 which provides that the Managing Committee shall exercise all the powers and discharge all the duties of the Society except those reserved for General Body subject to any regulations or restrictions duly laid down by the Society in General Meetings or in the bye-laws.
In particular the Managing Committee shall have the powers to appoint, suspend, dismiss or punish employees subject to any conditions laid down by the Registrar from time to time against whom an order of dismissal is passed and such employee may file an appeal before the concerned Assistant Registrar within 30 days of the order of such dismissal and the order of the Assistant Registrar shall be final.
This bye-law does not confer any power on the Assistant Registrar, Cooperative Societies to decide the appeal as it is ultra vires, against the provisions of Punjab Co- operative Societies Act and Rules framed thereunder.
The Bye-laws of a Society can be made only regarding the business, constitution and management of the Society and so far as a dispute between a dismissed employee and the Society is concerned, that is outside the scope of business, constitution or the management of the Society and as such by registering the said Bye-law the Assistant Registrar has done indirectly what he has been prohibited from doing directly.
In short the Society has challenged the jurisdiction of the Assistant Registrar, Cooperative Societies in deciding the appeal of Shri Chamkaur Singh vide Annexure P-3 and has prayed for the quashment of the same.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
Respondnets 1 and 2 filed a separate written statement and it was pleaded that Assistant Registrar was competent to hear the appeal against the termination of the employee of the Cooperative Agricultural Service Society under Bye-law No. (XVIII)(a) of the Model Bye-laws and the aforesaid Bye-law had been adopted by the petitioner society.
The appeal of Shri Chamkaur Singh had been decided on merits.
Moreover the President of the Society admitted before the Assistant Registrar and gave some concession which is mentioned in the orders itself.
4.
Separate statement was also filed by respondent No. 3.
Chamkaur Singh who pleaded that point of jurisdiction was not raised before the Tribunal.
The petitioner Society had tried to remain on fence and submitted to the jurisdiction and now aggrieved by the order Annexure P-3, cannot avail the remedy of the writ.
In the alternative it was pleaded that Assistant Registrar had the right and the jurisdiction to hear the appeal.
It was also pleaded that the order Annexure P-3 was based on consent and it cannot be challenged in the writ jurisdictions.
The petitioner Society aggrieved in the reinstatement of respondent No. 3.
It was also pleaded that Model Bye-laws in principle would apply to a situation which may occur in the society prior to its registration.
It was also pleaded by respondent No. 3 that the petitioner has the remedy of filing the revision petition under section 69 of the Punjab Cooperative Societies Act.
After denying the material averments of the writ petition, respondents have also prayed for the dismissal of the writ petition.
5.
I have heard Sh. BS Khoji, Advocate, on behalf of the petitioner, Sh. PS Chinna, Sr. DAG (Punjab) on behalf of respondents No. 1 and 2 and Shri B.S.
Shant, Advocate, on behalf of respondent No. 3 and with their assistance have gone through the record of this case.
6.
Before I decide the points for determination arising from this writ petition, I would like to make a brief reference with regard to Annexure P-3.
It would show that Shri Chamkaur Singh filed an appeal against the Society and the appeal of the society was argued on merit and the Asstt.
Registrar, came to the following conclusion after hearing the arguments :  ``If both the resolutions are kept in view, it is observed that the Committee of the Society wanted to appoint their own and near person, and the services of Chamkaur Singh were terminated on the alleged plea of absence from duty and non-furnishing of surety/security.
Besides, the Managing Committee of the society did not give any warning for his absence nor one month's notice, as per rules, for terminating his services, has been given.
Therefore, the charge of absence from duty was just an excuse for terminating the service of Chamkaur singh, but in fact they wanted to appoint their own man which they did by removing Chamkaur Singh.''
7.
Thus it would show that this was not passed on consent as alleged by respondent No. 3.
Rather the findings were given by the Assistant Registrar on merits when it further held that Managing Committees of the society while terminating the services of respondent No. 3 was at wrong and the resolution passed by the society was set aside and Chamkaur Singh was reinstated by accepting his appeal.
8.
The first point for determination in this case would be whether the Assistant Registrar, Cooperative Societies had the jurisdiction to hear the appeal of Shri Chamkaur Singh.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the order Annexure P-3 has been passed without jurisdiction because under the Punjab Cooperative Societies Act, 1961 or under the Rules no power has been conferred to hear any appeal against the order of termination of an employee who in the given circumstances had only the right of refer the matter for adjudication before the Labour Court.
There is force in the submission raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner as the Assistant Registrar, Co-operative Societies had derived the power on the basis of the Bye-law No. 38 (XVIII)(a).
9.
Now the question arises if any Bye-law of the Society has the force of law because the right of appeal is conferred by a statute and the Bye-law of a Society framed in pursuance of the Punjab Co-operative Societies Act cannot be held to have the force of law.
It has been held in Co-operative Central Bank v. The Additional Industrial Tribunal, AIR 1970 Supreme Court 245, that the Bye-laws of a Cooperative Society framed in pursuance of the provisions of the Act cannot be held to be a law or to have the force of law.
It has no doubt been held that if a statute gives power to a Government or other Authority to make Rules, the Rules so framed have the force of statute and are deemed to be incorporated as part of the statute.
That principle, however, does not apply to Bye-laws of the nature that a Co- operative Society is empowered by the Act to make.
The Bye-laws rather contemplated by the Act can be merely those which govern internal management, business or the administration of a Society.
They are the Articles of Association of a Company incorporated under the Companies Act.
They may be binding between the persons affected by them but they do not have the force of a statute.
In 1977 PLJ 310, Joginder Singh v. The Registrar Co-operative Societies, it was held that Bye-law of a Co-operative Society cannot be held to be a law nor such Bye-law does have the force of law.
The Hon'ble Division Bench held as follows at page No. 312 :-  ``We are unable to accept he submission that the Bye-laws of a Cooperative Society framed in pursuance of the provision of the Act can be held to be law or to have the force of law.
It has no doubt been held that, if a statute gives power to a Govt. or other authority to make rules, the rules so framed have the force of statute and are to be deemed be incorporated as a part of the statute.
That principle, however, does not apply to Bye-laws of the nature that a cooperative society is empowered by the Act to make.
The Bye-laws that are contemplated by the Act can be merely those that govern the internal management, business or administration of a society.
They may be binding, between the persons affected by them, but they do not have the force of a statute ...................
The bye-laws that can be framed by a society under the Act are similar in nature to the Articles of Association of a Company incorporated under the Companies Act and such Articles of Association have never been held to have the force of law.''
10.
In this situation, if any order has been passed in violation of the above said principle, it would amount to the exercise of jurisdiction in illegal manner, as held in Jai Bhagwan v. Smt. Lajwanti, 1978 PLJ 276.
Faced with this situation, the counsel appearing on behalf of respondent No. 3 invited my attention to Model Bye-law No. XXXVIII which was adopted by the Society, in which there is a specific provision than an appeal is maintainable against the order of dismissal and such an appeal can be heard by Assistant Registrar, Co-operative Societies.
It was submitted that once the Model Bye-law has been adopted by the Society, it is not open for it to say that Assistant Registrar, Cooperative Societies had no jurisdiction to hear the appeal.
The first submission raised by the learned counsel for the respondent No. 3 is of no avail as I have said in the earlier portion of this judgment that the right of appeal is a right conferred under a statute or under the statutory Rules framed under the Act.
A study of the provisions of Cooperative Societies Act and its Rules would show that no remedy of appeal has been provided.
The matter in dispute was with regard to the termination of the services of Shri Chamkaur Singh and it could be referred to the appropriate Govt. for making a reference to the Labour Court.
11.
The second submission which was raised by the learned counsel for the respondent No. 3 in order to defeat the argument of Shri Khoji was that the Society had acquiesced and submitted to the jurisdiction of the Assistant Registrar, Co-operative Societies and now it is not open for it to challenge the jurisdiction in the writ petition.
This argument is also devoid of any merit.
No amount of acquisitive or consent can validate any action of a public authority which had no inherent jurisdiction to deal with a matter.
The assistant Registrar was not competent under the Bye-laws to decide an appeal and by participation on the part of the Society it cannot be held that the Assistant Registrar, Co-operative Societies got the jurisdiction which was never conferred upon him either by the statute or under the Rules having the force of the statute.
12.
In view of the above I have no hesitation in allowing the writ petition by setting aside the orders contained in Annexure P-3.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.