Satyabrata Sinha, J - The petitioner in this application has, inter alia, questioned an order of suspension dated 27689 with effect from 21689 for being arrested and implicated in Jadavpur Police Station Case No. 304 dated 21689 under sections 498A/306 of the Indian Penal Code, as his continuance in service will be prejudicial to public interest.
2.
Mr. Lahiri, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner has raised several contentions in support of this application.
Learned counsel firstly submits that an order of suspension as against a police officer could be passed only in terms of Regulation 880 of the Police Regulation Bengal, 1943.
Learned counsel next contends that a person cannot be placed under suspension for unduly a long period unless a positive departmental action is taken against him.
According to the learned counsel, no departmental proceeding has yet been initiated, and thus his prolonged suspension must be held to be wholly illegal and without jurisdiction.
In support of his aforementioned contentions, learned counsel strongly relies upon a decision of GN Ray, J (as His Lordship then was) in the case of Dhiraj Kumar Roychowdhury reported in (1989)2 Cal LJ 134, a decision of this Court in the case of Samiran Chakraborty v. Union of India & Ors., reported in (1992)1 Cal HN 398, and a decision of Kerala High Court in the case of Subramoniam v. State of Kerala & Ors., reported in (1973)1 SLR 521.
Regulation 880 of the Police Regulations reads thus :  "880.
(a) Suspension is not to be considered a specific punishment, and is only authorised in cases where the continuance in an office of an officer pending enquiry into his conduct is prejudicial to public interest.
When the enquiry is completed, some definite order of acquittal or punishment shall be recorded."
3.
It is admitted that the petitioner was prosecuted for alleged commission of an offence under sections 306/498A of the Indian Penal Code and he has been convicted therein.
It further appears that the petitioner has preferred an appeal being Criminal Appeal No. 6 of 1995, and by an order dated 6.1.95 the appeal was admitted and the petitioner has been released on bail.
4.
There cannot be any doubt that an order of suspension cannot be passed with retrospective effect in absence of any specific rules.
However, GN Ray, J, in Dhiraj Kumar Roychowdhury's case (supra), has held that an employer has an inherent right to place an employee under suspension.
5.
The only constraint for exercising such power would be that the same cannot be used on mere liking of the employer or capriciously.
6.
A police personnel who has been convicted in a criminal case under sections 306/498A of the Indian Penal Code must be held to be a person who, in my opinion, should not be allowed to attend his duties.
7.
There cannot also be any doubt that a person should not be kept under prolonged suspension for a long time, keeping in view the fact that the petitioner has been convicted recently and he had preferred an appeal only in January 1995, in my opinion, it is too early to direct the respondents to revoke the said order of suspension.
8.
It is not one of such cases where the order of suspension has been passed lightly and without application of mind.
The very fact that a police officer has been convicted by a competent criminal court for commission of a heinous offence, goes to show that his continuance in service would cause considerable embarrassment to the concerned authorities.
9.
It is now also well known that this Court in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India does not interfere with an order only because it would be lawful to do so.
Keeping in view the facts and circumstances of this case, and particularly in view of the fact that the petitioner has been convicted in a criminal case in a heinous offence, in my opinion, it is not a fit case in which this Court should exercise its extraordinary constitutional writ jurisdiction in favour of the petitioner except to the extent that his order of suspension with retrospective effect must be declared to be bad in law.
However, keeping in view the fact that the petitioner has been placed under suspension in the year 1989, in my opinion, it will be proper if the learned Sessions Judge, South 24 Parganas, disposes of the aforementioned Criminal Appeal No. 6 of 1995, at an early date, inasmuch as, it goes without saying that in the event the said appeal is allowed and the order of conviction passed as against the petitioner is set aside, he would be entitled to be reinstated in service, unless the concerned authorities desire to initiate a departmental proceeding as against him.
The learned Sessions Judge, South 24 Parganas is, therefore, requested to dispose of the said criminal appeal at an early date and preferably within a period of 8 weeks from the date of communication of this order.
10.
However, Mr. Lahiri submits that during the period the petitioner had been placed under suspension, there has been a revision of his scale of pay in terms of the West Bengal Revision of Pay and Allowances Rules.
If the petitioner is entitled to the said benefit, there cannot be any doubt that the subsistence allowance payable to the petitioner should be paid on that basis, inasmuch as, although the petitioner has been placed under interim order of suspension, relationship of master and servant continues, and the petitioner would be entitled to all benefits of revision of pay scale.
It is further made clear that in the event no subsistence allowance has been paid to the petitioner for the period from the date of his arrest till his release on bail, subsistence allowance should also be paid for that period in accordance with law.
11.
The application is disposed of with the aforementioned observations and directions.