RP Sethi, J - The petitioner who is about 80 years of age has been running from pillar to post during the last two decades for the grant of pension payable to the freedom fighters but without any positive result.
He has approached this Court for the second time with the prayer for issuance of a direction to the respondents to grant him pension under the provisions of Swatantrata Sainik Sammann Pension Scheme, 1980 (for short, the `Scheme') on the ground that he had allegedly suffered imprisonment during freedom movement of the country.
The claim of the petitioner has been resisted on the ground that the petitioner was not a freedom fighter within the meaning of the aforesaid Scheme.
2.
Under the Scheme a person who has suffered a minimum imprisonment of six months in the mainland jails before independence is held eligible for the grant of Samman Pension.
Detention under the orders of the competent authority has been directed to be considered as an imprisonment.
Period of normal remission upto one month is required to be treated as part of actual imprisonment.
After the judgment of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 781 of 1992 decided on 27th May, 1993, the respondent authorities vide Annexure P/1 rejected the claim of the petitioner after finding some discrepancies in the record produced by him in support of his averments to the effect that he had suffered imprisonment within the meaning of the Scheme.
The petitioner was alleged to have wrongly claimed to have participated in the Quit India Movement and was awarded `Najarbandi' by the Special Magistrate Shri Suleman Malik for 9 months from August, 1942 to April, 1943 in Central Jail, Lahore.
It was found that the claim made by the petitioner in his application dated 11th July, 1981 was contrary to his stand that he had participated in the Quit India Movement and was awarded one year imprisonment under Rule 39 of Defence of India Rules by A.D.M., Lahore from 25th September, 1942 to 24th July, 1943.
The Punjab Government had reported that the petitioner was imprisoned from 20th October, 1942 to 24th July, 1943 in Central Jail, Lahore on account of his participation in the Quit India Movement.
As there were some discrepancies regarding the period of imprisonment suffered by the petitioner, the respondents rejected the claim of the petitioner holding :-  ``Taking all aspects of your case in consideration, it is concluded that you had made out your claim on the basis of C.P.Cs.
for the grant of pension while you did not undergo any sufferings.
In view of the above circumstances, your case is not found genuine for the purpose of grant of pension and it is regretted that the decision of rejection already arrived at, could not be altered.''
It may be noticed that the Scheme was introduced with the object of providing grant of pension to living freedom fighters and their families and to the families of martyrs.
It has to be kept in mind that million of masses of this country had participated in the freedom struggle without any expectation of the grant of the Scheme at the relevant time.
It has also to be kept in mind that in the partition of the country most of the citizens who suffered imprisonment were handicapped to get the relevant record from the Jails where they had suffered imprisonment.
In appreciating the claim of the freedom fighters a rational and not a technical approach is required to be adopted.
3.
The Supreme Court in Mukand Lal v. Union of India, Writ Petition No.153 of 1992 decided on 14th May, 1993 observed that as the Scheme had been introduced with the genuine desire to assist and honour those who had given the best part of their life for the country, it ill-behoves the Government to raise technical pleas like the plea of limitation against such claims.
Infact, the Government, if it is possible for them to do so, should find out the freedom fighters or their dependents and approach them with the pension instead of requiring them to make applications for the same.
It was further observed that all those persons who were found to have participated in the independence movement be granted pension and claims of only such persons be rejected who are found to have preferred false, frivolous and concocted claims.
4.
The standard of proof required in such cases is not such standard which is required in a criminal case or in a case adjudicated upon the rival contentions or evidence of the parties.
As the object of the Scheme is to honour and to mitigate the sufferings of those who had given their all for the country, a liberal and not a technical approach is required to be followed while determining the merits of the case of a person seeking pension under the Scheme.
It should not be forgotten that the persons intended to be covered by Scheme have suffered for the country about half a century back and had not expected to be rewarded for the imprisonment suffered by them.
Once the country has decided to honour such freedom fighters, the bureaucrats entrusted with the job of examining the cases of such freedom fighters are expected to keep in mind the purpose and object of the Scheme.
The case of the claimants under this Scheme is required to be determined on the basis of the probabilities and not on the touch-stone of the test of beyond reasonable doubt.
Once on the basis of the evidence it is probablised that the claimant had suffered imprisonment for the cause of the country and during the freedom struggle, a presumption is required to be drawn in his favour unless the same is rebutted by cogent, reasonable and reliable evidence.
5.
In the instant case, the petitioner is shown to have filed his application for the grant of pension under the Scheme alongwith the documents and affidavits which after being considered on the touch-stone of beyond reasonable doubt was found to be insufficient by the respondent-authorities.
The petitioner had, however, probablised his claim of having suffered imprisonment for more than six months as contemplated by the Scheme and was, therefore, entitled to the grant of such benefit.
6.
Shri Bhagat Singh s/o Shri Wadhawa Singh who is recipient of Tamra Patra and a Central Freedom Fighter Pension had certified that the petitioner was a bona-fide freedom fighter who was imprisoned on account of his participation in the Quit India Movement during the freedom struggle and was lodged in Central Jail, Lahore alongwith him during the period from 25th September, 1942 to 24th July, 1943.
Similarly a `Sanman Pattar' (Annexure P/3) was presented to the petitioner by the Punjab State Freedom Fighters Committee.
One Hind Pal Singh, aged 76 years in 1979, had stated on oath that the petitioner had suffered Najarbandi for about nine months in Central Jail, Lahore, for taking active part in the freedom movement ``Quit India'' during the year 1943.
One Mokan Singh son of Waryam Singh is also shown to have certified that the petitioner was a freedom fighter and was arrested by the Police and awarded nine months `Najarbandi'.
The Government of Punjab vide its letter No. 1(1)-52-7 P II-82/19799, dated 28th July, 1983 had certified that the petitioner was imprisoned from 20th October, 1942 to 24th July, 1943 in Central Jail, Lahore on account of his participation in the Quit India Movement during the freedom struggle.
7.
The minor discrepancies regarding the actual date of imprisonment suffered about a half century back could not be made a basis for dismissal of the claim of the petitioner who otherwise had probablised his imprisonment during the freedom struggle.
The action of the respondents in rejecting the prayer of the petitioner was, therefore, uncalled for and is liable to be set aside.
Relying upon the judgment of the Supreme Court in Mukand Lal's case (supra) the petitioner has prayed for the grant of pension with effect from the date of his application.
However, keeping in view the facts and circumstances of the case we have come to the conclusion that ends of justice would be met if the petitioner is granted pension under the Scheme with effect from the date of filing of this petition i.e. January, 1994.
8.
Accordingly, the writ petition is disposed of by quashing the order dated 16th September, 1993 (Annexure P/1) and holding the petitioner entitled to the grant of pension under the Swatantrata Sainik Samman Pension Scheme, 1980.
In the peculiar circumstances of the case, a direction is issued to the respondents to grant to the petitioner pension under the provisions of the Scheme with effect from January, 1994.
Petition allowed.