GS Singhvi, J - This petition involves a challenge to the seniority list of Principals who are members of the Haryana Education Service Class II (Men's Branch).
Petitioners have prayed for quashing of Annexure P-8 and for issue of a direction to the respondents to implement the reservation policy (Annexure P-3) and to assign them seniority in accordance with the rules.
2.
Petitioners Zile Singh, Chander Bhan and Brahma Nand belong to Scheduled Castes.
All of them had applied for recruitment to the posts of Principal in response to an advertisement issued by the Haryana Public Services Commission (for short, 'the Commission') in the year 1986 for recruitment of 17 Principals in Haryana Education Service Class II (Men's Branch).
Three of these posts were reserved for Scheduled Castes, three for Backward Class and one for ex-serviceman.
Subsequently, the number of posts was increased to 25 and of them four were to be filled from amongst scheduled castes candidates.
On the basis of selection made by the Commission, 25 persons were appointed as principals of the Government Senior Secondary Schools vide order dated 1371987 (Annexure P-2).
Names of the petitioners appeared at Serial Nos. 19, 23 and 25 in Annexure P-2.
On the basis of order (Annexure P-2) the petitioners joined the Government service and are presently holding the posts of Principals.
Claiming that they are entitled to be assigned seniority according to the roster system prescribed by the Government, petitioner No. 1 made representations to the Government (Annexure P-4 to P-7).
His representation have been rejected by the Director, Secondary Education, Haryana and a communication to this effect has been sent to the Director, Welfare of Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes, Haryana, with a copy to the petitioner.
This was followed by seniority list (Annexure P-10) dated 3091989, wherein the names of the petitioners have been shown at serial Nos. 119, 123 and 125.
Petitioners have pleaded that assignment of seniority to them without due regard to the reservation points prescribed by the Government for giving effect to the roster, is perverse, arbitrary, unreasonable and unfair.
The petitioners have contended that all the candidates who are selected against reservation points have a right to be placed in the seniority list according to the reservation points and they cannot be assigned seniority by inter-relating their merit with general category candidates.
3.
While controverting the claim of the petitioners, respondents have in their written statement pleaded that service conditions of the officers of the Haryana Education Service Class II are governed by the provisions of the Punjab Educational Services (Class II) Rules, 1934, which have been adopted by the Government of Haryana and have been amended vide notification dated 9.3.1973 (Annexure R-10).
Case of the respondents is that seniority of the officers of the Haryana Education Services Class-II has been determined strictly in accordance with Rule 10 of 1934 Rules.
Respondents have seriously contested the plea raised by the petitioners that seniority should be determined according to the roster points and that the candidates belonging to the reserved category cannot be inter-laced with the general category candidates for the purpose of deciding their relative merit.
Further case of the respondents is that seniority of all the direct recruits is required to be fixed according to the combined merit list and the roster is relevant only for the purpose of determining the number of candidates of reserved categories who are entitled to be selected and appointed irrespective of their position in the overall merit list and that the policy of reservation cannot be reflected in the seniority list of the officers.
4.
Argument of Shri CM Chopra is that once the roster points are determined and the vacancies advertised to be filled by direct recruitment are earmarked for the candidates belonging to the reserved category, candidates selected against such vacancies acquire a legal right to be appointed in service as per the roster points and, therefore, they are also entitled to be assigned seniority in accordance with their placement in the roster.
Shri Chopra strenuously argued that if seniority list is allowed to be prepared on the basis of overall merit, the very object of giving benefit of reservations to the members of Scheduled Castes will be defeated.
Learned counsel argued that roster system should be read as part and parcel of the rule relating to seniority and, therefore, the petitioners ought to have been assigned seniority according to the roster points.
5.
Ms. Bahri argued that seniority in the cadre has nothing to do with the reservation in favour of the members of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Backward Classes and other categories of persons.
She submitted that seniority has to be determined as per the existing rules governing the seniority and in the absence of any provisions in such rules for assigning seniority to the members of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes etc. according to the roster points the persons belonging to reserved categories are not entitled to be assigned seniority as per the roster points.
She further argued that the petitioners have been assigned seniority in accordance with their merit in the selection made by the Commission and no injustice has been done to the petitioners  6.
Article 14 of the Constitution of India embodies the doctrine of 'Equality'.
It injuncts the State from denying to any person equality before the law or the equal protection of the laws within the territory of India.
Article 16 contains positive as well as negative provisions.
Article 16 (1) guarantees equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters relating to employment or appointment to any office under the State.
Article 16(2) says that no citizen shall be discriminated on the grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, descent, place of birth, residence or any of them in respect of any employment or office under the State.
At the same time, Article 16(3) empowers the Parliament to make law prescribing the requirement of residence within the State or Union Territory prior to an employment or appointment in regard to a class or classes of employment or appointment to an office under the Government of a State or Union Territory or any other local authority.
Similarly, Article 16(4) empowers the State to make provisions for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of citizens which, in the opinion of the State, is not adequately represented in the service under the State, Article 46 enjoins upon the State to promote with special care the educational and economic interests of the weaker sections of the people in general and of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in particular.
Article 335 of the Constitution provides that claims of members of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes shall be taken into consideration in the making of appointments to services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union or of a State with due regard to the efficiency of administration.
Provisions of Articles 16(1), 16(4), 46 and 335 of the Constitution are useful for the purpose of deciding this case and are, therefore, quoted below :  "Article 16.
Equality of opportunity in matters of public employment :  (1) There shall be equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters relating to employment or appointment to any office under the State.
(4) Nothing in this Article shall prevent the State from making any provision for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of citizens, which in the opinion of the State, is not adequately represented in the services under the State.
Article 46 : Promotion of educational and economic interests of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other weaker sections :  The State shall promote with special care the educational and economic interests of the weaker sections of the people, and, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, and shall protect them from social injustice and all forms of exploitation.
Article 335 : Claims of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes to services and posts :  The claims of the members of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes shall be taken into consideration, consistently with the maintenance of efficiency of administration in the making of appointments to services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union or of a State."
7.
Keeping in view these constitutional provisions, the Central Government as well as the State Governments have provided for reservation for the members of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and these provisions have been upheld by the Courts from time to time.
Initially, the reservation was made only in favour of the Scheduled Castes and that too at the stage of initial appointment.
Subsequently, the reservation was introduced for Scheduled Tribes as well and also at the stage of promotion from one post to another.
In order to implement the reservation made in favour of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, the Governments have introduced roster system as well as carry forward rule.
A number of conflicting decisions have been given by the Courts on the issue of reservation at the stage of promotion but the controversy stands settled by the majority judgment in Indira Sawhney v. Union of India, 1993(1) SCT 448 (SC) : JT 1992(6) SC 273.
8.
What the petitioners have claimed is that they should be assigned seniority as per the roster points and not as per their position in overall merit-list prepared by the Commission.
Learned counsel for the parties have made reference to the provisions of the Punjab Educational Service (Class II) Rules, 1934 (for short, the 1934 Rules) which have been made applicable to the employees of the Government of Haryana.
The Governor of Haryana has also made amendment in these Rules in exercise of his powers under proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India.
For better appreciation of the case of the petitioners, a brief reference to the various provisions of 1934 Rules would be helpful.
Rule 2 of these Rules contains definitions of various terms, including the term 'service', which means the Punjab (should be read as Haryana in this case) Educational Service (Class II).
Rule 3 deals with constitution of the service.
Rule 6 specifies the method of recruitment through the Public Service Commission or the Education Board.
Rule 10 governs the seniority of the members of the service.
As it stood prior to the Haryana amendment brought about vide notification dated 9.3.1973, Rule 10 provided for seniority based on the date of confirmation.
Provisos (1) to (4) to that Rule dealt with the seniority where two or more members were confirmed on the same date.
Rule 10 was amended vide notification No. GSR-37/Const./Art.
309/Amd.
(2)/73 dated 9.3.1973 published in the Haryana Government Gazette, Legislative Supplement, dated 1331973.
As per the amended Rule 10 inter se seniority of the members of the service is required to be determined by the length of continuous service on any post in the service.
Second proviso to this Rule lays down that in case of the members appointed by direct recruitment, the order of the merit determined by the Commission shall not be disturbed in fixing the seniority.
The amended Rule 10 reads as under :  "Seniority of members of the service :  Rule 10 :  The seniority inter se of members of the service shall be determined by the length of continuous service on any point in the service :  Provided that where there are different cadres in the service, the seniority shall be determined separately for each cadr :  Provided further that in the case of members appointed by direct recruitment, the order of merit determined by the Commission shall not be disturbed in fixing the seniority :  Provided further that in the case of two or more members appointed on the same date, their seniority shall be determined as follows :-  (a) a member appointed by direct recruitment shall be senior to a member appointed by promotion or by transfer;  (b) a member appointed by promotion shall be senior to a member appointed by transfer;  (c) in the case of members appointed by promotion or by transfer seniority shall be determined according to the seniority of such members in the appointments from which they were promoted or transferred; and  (d) in the case of members appointed by transfer from different cadres, their seniority shall be determined according to pay, preference being given to a member who was drawing a higher rate of pay in his previous appointment; and if the rates of pay drawn are also the same, then by length of their services in the previous appointment and if the length of such service is also the same, the cider member shall be senior to the younger member.
Note 1 : This rule shall not apply to members appointed on purely provisional basis, pending their passing the qualifying test.
Note 2: In the case of members whose period of probation is extended under rule 9 of the date of appointment for the purposes of this rule shall be deemed to have been deferred to the extent the period of probation is extended."
9.
Perusal of the various provisions contained in 1934 Rules and particularly Rule 10 shows that these Rules do not contain any provision for reservation in favour of the members of Scheduled Castes/Tribes.
It is, however, not in dispute that the administrative instructions issued by the Government from time to time for reservation of posts/vacancies for Scheduled Castes/Backward Classes have been applied while making recruitment to the various services under the Government.
These administrative instructions owe their existence to Article 16(4) of the Constitution.
The Courts have also upheld the policy of reservation adopted by the Government for recruitment to various services because the same is not in inconsistence with the provisions contained in the Rules framed under proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution But that cannot give rise to an inference that the Government as the power to issue administrative instructions inconsistent with the statutory rules, for it is a well settled principle of law that the Government is not vested with the power to issue administrative instructions which are not consistent with the statutory rules.
Another settled principle of law is that the government cannot amend, vary or modify the statutory rules by administrative order/executive instructions.
Therefore, in the absence of any express provision in Rule 10 or any other rule of 1934 Rules, the Government cannot be treated as having power to issue administrative instructions for determination of seniority of the reserved category employees as per the roster points.
Since rule 10 speaks of seniority of direct recruits according to the order of merit assigned by the Commission, no amount of administrative instructions issued by the Government can give rise to a claim that seniority of the reserved category employees be determined ignoring their merit.
Therefore, the argument of Shri Chopra that seniority of the petitioners should be determined as per the roster points cannot be accepted Though the learned counsel for the petitioners has not brought to the notice of the Court any executive instructions issued by the Government for determination of seniority of Scheduled Castes as per the roster points, in my opinion even if such instructions were to be issued by the Government after the amendment of Rule 10 of 1934 Rules, the same will have to be ignored on the ground of inconsistency of such instructions with Rule 10.
10.
The matter deserves to be looked into from another angle.
Though there may be some constitutional and political justification for reservation of posts in favour of Scheduled Castes/Backward Classes and on the basis of such reservation appointment may be given to the members of Scheduled Castes/Backward Classes against the vacancies reserved for them irrespective of their lower merit position, acceptance of claim of such appointees to be assigned seniority as per the roster points will lead to wholly anomalous and absurd results.
The concept of reservations inheres in itself appointments of persons having lesser merit because an otherwise meritorious person gets a right to be appointed irrespective of reservation.
Conditions of service of the employees belonging to the general category as well as reserved categories are regulated by the same set of rules.
Therefore, only in regard to seniority, different provisions cannot be applied to the members of service belonging to the same cadre for determination of seniority.
If reserved category candidates are to be assigned seniority as per the roster point, two sets of conditions of service in regard to seniority would operate, i.e. one for the candidates belonging to general category and the other for the candidates belonging to the reserved categories.
This anomalous position can be avoided by treating the same set of rules applicable for determination of seniority of all persons irrespective of their status as a general category candidates and as reserved categories candidates.
11.
A close look at the various Circulars issued by the Government for giving effect to the reservation policy shows that it has in the first instance prescribed the percentage of reservation for the members of Scheduled Castes, Backward Classes and other categories.
Rosters have been innovated by the Government with the object of giving effect to the reservation prescribed by the Government.
Once the percentage of reservation is achieved, members belonging to the reserved categories do not get preference in the matter of appointment.
This principle of law has been laid down in RK Sabharwal and others v. State of Punjab and others, 1995(2) SCT 646(SC) : JT 1995(2) SC 351.
The sole purpose of devising the roster is to earmark the vacancies for the members of Scheduled Castes etc.
The roster enables the competent authority to pinpoint the vacancies meant for Scheduled Castes etc. and communicate the same to the selecting agencies.
After the process of selection is complete, appointment is given to the selected candidates, (general as well as reserved categories) against the available vacant posts.
As soon as the appointments are made, roster ceases to operate.
Therefore, it is not possible to accept the plea of the petitioners that roster point should be read as a part of the seniority rule and they should be assigned seniority according to the roster points irrespective of their merit position.
12.
The decision of the Supreme Court in State of Punjab v. Hira Lal, 1971(2) SLR 98, on which reliance has been placed by the learned counsel for the petitioners does not have any bearing on the point raised in this petition.
That was a case in which the respondents had questioned the applicability of reservation at the time of promotion.
His argument found favour with the High Court but their Lordships of the Supreme Court rejected the contention and held that reservation at the time of promotion was permissible.
In Jaswant Singh v. Secretary, Punjab Government, 1989(4) SLR 257, a passing observation has been made in para 14 that in case of appointment at a reserved point in a roster, the seniority of the Scheduled Castes/Backward Class candidates shall be the roster point.
However, a careful reading of the decision of the Full Bench clearly shows that the question which has been directly raised in this case did not arise for consideration before the Full Bench.
In fact, the argument on behalf of the general category candidates was that even when a member belonging to Scheduled Caste is promoted in preference to a general category candidate, the general category candidate shall retain his seniority in the original cadre despite his subsequent promotion to the next higher post.
This argument did not find favour with the Full Bench.
Therefore, the observations made in para 14 of that decision cannot be read as laying down a proposition of law that seniority should be assigned to the reserved category candidates in accordance with the roster points.
A reference in the Full Bench judgment has been made to a decision of the Supreme Court in Hira Lal v. District Judge, Ghaziabad, AIR 1984 SC 1212.
That judgment also does not lay down a proposition supporting the view that seniority to the reserved category candidates is to be assigned as per the roster points irrespective of their merit in the selection.
13.
In the result, there is no merit in the writ petition and, therefore, the same is dismissed.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.