NK Sodhi, J - Petitioner was appointed as an Assistant Foreman-cum-D.G.
Mechanic on 1761988 and his basic salary was Rs. 1,300/- per month.
He was thereafter promoted as foreman (DG Set and Boiler) and claims that he has been getting out of turn incentives from his employer, the second respondent herein on account of the good work done by him.
His services were terminated with effect from March 13, 1993 and he raised an industrial dispute by serving a demand notice under Section 2-A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for short the Act).
On receipt of this notice from the petitioner, conciliation proceedings were held and both the parties were issued notices to appear before the Conciliation Officer.
The management pleaded that the petitioner had abandoned his services when he was drawing a salary of Rs. 3,555/- plus other allowances and having been promoted to the post of foreman he had a contingent of five employees including an Assistant foreman working under him.
For this reason, it was contended that the petitioner is not a workman within the meaning of Clause (s) of Section 2 of the Act.
The workman had alleged that he was performing manual duties and he was, therefore, covered by the definition of `workman'.
The Conciliation Officer heard the parties and despite his efforts to persuade them to come to an amicable settlement the proceedings proved abortive and he sent his failure report to the State Government.
On a consideration of the failure report and other material on the record the Joint Secretary, Government of Haryana as per his communication dated 26101993 (Annexure P4 with the writ petition, declined to refer the dispute for adjudication.
This communication when translated in English reads as under :-  ``Subject :- Demand notice dated 8.3.1993 against M/s Milkfoods Limited, Plot 5 Maruti Industrial Complex, Sector 18, Gurgaon.
On the above cited subject you are informed that the State Government does not consider your case fit for reference to the Court for adjudication because you do not fall under the definition of `workman."
It is this order that has been challenged in the present writ petition on the ground that the State Government usurped the powers of the adjudicating authority in recording a finding that the petitioner was not a workman and, therefore, acted illegally and beyond the scope of its powers.
It was also contended that the question whether an employee is a workman to have been left for the adjudicating authority to decide.
In support of this contention, the learned counsel for the petitioner relied upon the judgment of the Supreme Court in Telco Convey Drivers Mazdoor Sangh v. State of Bihar, 1990 (1) R.S.J.
834 and on a Division Bench of the Kerala High Court in Govindan v. Sankaran, AIR 1958 Kerala 203.
2.
Mr. RS Randhawa, Advocate appearing for the second respondent contended that it was open to the State Government to prima facie examine the merits of the dispute before the same could be referred for adjudication under Section 10(1) of the Act.
He also submitted that in view of the nature of the duties performed by the petitioner which were brought to the notice of the State Government in the course of conciliation proceedings it was justified to say that the petitioner was not a workman as he was performing supervisory duties and drawing wages exceeding Rs. 1,600/- per mensem.
According to the learned counsel the reference was rightly declined by the State Government.
Counsel for the management placed strong reliance on the judgment of the Supreme Court in Prem Kakkar v. State of Haryana and another, AIR 1976 SC 1474.
3.
On the rival contentions advanced by the parties, the question that arises for determination is whether the State Government can decline to make a reference on the ground that the employee raising the dispute is not a workman within the meaning of the Act.
This very question arose before me in Sushila Mittal v. Labour Commissioner, Punjab and others, Civil Writ Petition No8207 of 1987 decided on November 24, 1993.
After taking note of the judgments of the Supreme Court in Prem Kakkar's case (supra) and Telco Convey Drivers' case (supra) and some other decisions including the judgment of the Constitution Bench in State of Bombay v. KP Krishnan, AIR 1960 S.C. 1223 which was followed in Bombay Union of Journalists and others v. State of Bombay and another, AIR 1964 S.C. 1617 and the decision in Nirmal Singh v. State of Punjab and others, AIR 1984 S.C. 1619, the order of the State Government declining to refer the dispute for adjudication on the ground that the employee concerned was not a workman, was upheld and I took the following view :-  ``After going through these judgments in the light of the observations made by the Constitution Bench in KP Krishnan's case (supra) it becomes clear that patent frivolousness of perversity can be looked into by the Government while considering the question as to whether a reference should be made or not.
Patent frivolousness, in my opinion, can be examined only if the Government prima facie looks into the merits of the case as well, as observed by their Lordships in KP Krishnan's case (supra).
Under the provisions of the Act as they stand, the State Government is not a mere post office and is not called upon to refer every dispute that is sought to be raised by the workman.
It can examine prima facie the merits of the demands raised and if on a consideration of all the relevant factors it comes to a conclusion that the demands do not merit adjudication it would be open to it to decline the reference."
4.
In the present case, the rival stands of the parties were considered and the State Government prima facie found that petitioner herein was not a workman as alleged by the management.
For the detailed reasons mentioned in Sushila Mittal's case, the impugned order in the present case is upheld and I find no merit in the writ petition which is consequently dismissed.
There is no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.