GS Singhvi, J - The only issue which requires adjudication in this case is as to whether respondent No.2 was justified in making promotions to the posts of Clerks from amongst Class IV employees on the basis of the test held under his instructions, or, as to whether such promotions should have been made on the basis of seniority-cum-fitness in terms of rule 9 read with Appendix `B' to the Haryana Police Clerical (State Service Class III) Rules, 1977 (for short `the Rules of 1977').
2.
Petitioners Vidya Ram and Subhash Chander, who belong to backward classes and who have passed the Matriculation examination, are substantive Class IV employees and both of them fulfil the conditions of eligibility for promotion as Clerks.
There is no dispute between the parties that the petitioners are senior to respondents Nos. 3 to 9 in the cadre of Class IV employees and also that the service record of both these employees is clean.
3.
Petitioners have alleged that without considering their cases for promotion on the basis of seniority-cum-fitness, respondent No.2 has promoted respondents Nos3 to 9 on the basis of a test.
Respondents have justified their action of promoting the junior persons on the ground that the test was held in order to judge the efficiency of all the eligible persons to work as Clerks and only those, who were found suitable to discharge official work and English dictation which is necessary for the post of a Clerk, have been promoted.
4.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record and, in my considered opinion, the petitioners are right in making the grievance that they have been denied promotion for reasons which are not relevant.
Undisputedly, recruitment to the posts of Clerks in the Police Department is regulated by the provisions contained in the Rules of 1977.
Rule 9 of these Rules specifies methods of recruitment, one of which is by way of promotion from amongst Class IV employees.
Qualification and experience for promotion of Class IV employees as Clerks have been specified in Appendix `B' to the Rules of 1977.
A look at Appendix `B' shows that Restorers, Book Binders and other Class IV employees, who are either Graduates or are Matriculates with a minimum of 5 years' service, are eligible to be considered for promotion on the basis of seniority subject to fitness.
The expression ``seniority subject to fitness" can appropriately be read as ``seniority-cum-suitability" or ``seniority-cum-fitness".
Clause (iii) of Appendix `B' provides that a person who is appointed as Clerk by promotion shall have to pass the prescribed test in typing to be conducted by the appointing authority within a period of one year of his appointment and the grant of his annual grade increments shall be regulated in accordance with the instructions issued by the Government.
It is, thus, clear that passing of a test is not a condition precedent for promotion of a Class IV employee to the post of a Clerk.
Test is required to be passed only after one is promoted to the post of Clerk.
Such a promotee can be deprived of his annual grade increments till he passes the requisite test.
However, none of the rules of 1977 Rules lays down that a candidate must pass some test before he becomes eligible to be promoted as Clerk.
It must, therefore, be held that the condition of passing the test can be enforced by the Department only after a Class IV employee is promoted as a Clerk.
5.
The expression `seniority-cum-fitness' means that a person who is senior should ordinarily be promoted despite better merit of a junior.
The element of competitive consideration or simultaneous consideration of the candidature of all eligible persons is absent when promotion is made on the basis of seniority-cum-fitness.
A senior person can be ignored only if he is found unfit.
In State of Kerala and another v. NM Thomas and others, A.I.R. 1976 S.C. 490, the Supreme Court observed as under :-  ``The principle of equality is applicable to employment at all stages and in all respects namely, initial recruitment promotion, retirement, payment of pension and gratuity.
With regard to promotion the normal principles are either merit-cum-seniority or seniority-cum-merit.
Seniority- cum-merit means that given the minimum necessary merit requisite for efficiency of administration, the senior though the less meritorious shall have priority.
This will not violate Articles 14, 16(1) and 16(2).
A rule which provides that given the necessary requisite merit, a member of the backward class shall get priority to ensure adequate representation will not similarly violate Article 14 or Article 16(1) and (2).
The relevant touchstone of validity is to find out whether the rule of preference secures adequate representation for the unrepresented backward community or goes beyond it."
6.
In N Srinath, MA Somashekar, Assistant Director, Industries v. The State of Mysore and others, 1972 SLR 449, a Division Bench of Mysore High Court has held that when criteria for promotion is seniority-cum-merit the seniormost employee should be considered for promotion and if he is otherwise found fit he should be promoted, and only in case of unfitness/unsuitability his junior can be considered for promotion.
7.
In so far as this case is concerned, there is no allegation in the written statement that the petitioners are otherwise unfit to be promoted as Clerks.
Respondents have not pleaded that the service record of the petitioners is adverse or is otherwise unsatisfactory.
Without any such adversity being there, it was not open to respondent No.2 to supersede the petitioners only on the ground that the petitioners could not clear the test held under his instructions.
The holding of a test as a condition for promotion was clearly alien to the scheme of 1977 Rules.
Therefore, denial of promotion to the petitioners is liable to be invalidated.
8.
The matter can be looked into from another angle also.
By prescribing test as a condition for promotion from amongst Class IV employees etc. to the posts of Clerks, respondent No.2 has in effect added a condition of eligibility which does not find mention in the statutory Rules.
In a way respondent No.2 has amended the Rules of 1977.
This action of respondent No.2 cannot but be characterised as without jurisdiction because respondent No.2 is not vested with the power to make or to amend the statutory rules.
In State of Haryana v. Shamsher Jang Shukla, A.I.R. 1972 SC 1546, and SL Sachdev and another v. Union of India and others, 1980 (3) S.L.R.
503, the Supreme Court has held that the Government cannot amend or vary the rules by administrative orders nor can it impose additional conditions of eligibility for recruitment to a service.
Therefore, the action of respondent No.2 in holding the test as the basis for promotion from amongst Class IV employees to the posts of Clerks was clearly contrary to the provisions of 1977 Rules.
9.
Having held that the petitioners have been discriminated in the matter of promotion and that respondent No.2 has acted in contravention of the statutory rules while promoting respondents Nos3 to 9, who are admittedly junior to the petitioners, it is now required to be seen as to what relief should be given to the petitioners.
Ordinarily, this Court gives a direction for re- consideration of the cases of the petitioners for promotion to the next higher post.
However, in view of the admitted facts that the petitioners are senior to respondents ( Sic ) I deem it proper to direct respondent No.2 to promote the petitioners as Clerks with effect from 651992, i.e. the date on which juniors to the petitioners have been promoted.
This direction is consistent with the law laid down by the Supreme Court in The District Registrar, Palghat and another v. MB Koyakutty and others, 1979(1) S.L.R.
628.
10.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed.
Respondent No.2 is directed to issue appropriate order for promotion of the petitioners in accordance with the observations made herein above.
Such in order shall be issued within a period of three months.
The petitioners shall get all consequential benefits.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.