GS Singhvi, J - A short controversy raised in this writ petition relates to the legality of the order dated 24101994 (annexure P-5) passed by the Chief Town Planner, Punjab (respondent No.2) rejecting the application filed by the petitioner on 6.10.1994 seeking withdrawal of an earlier application filed by him for voluntary retirement.
2.
The brief facts which are necessary for the purpose of making an adjudication of the claim of the petitioner are that the petitioner had submitted an application for voluntary retirement on 20.12.1993.
That application was withdrawn by him and his request was accepted by the competent authority on 721994 before any order could be made on the first application submitted by the petitioner.
After about six months the petitioners once again made an application dated 2671994 seeking voluntary retirement from service with effect from the date of expiry of three months period.
This application of the petitioner was accepted by the Chief Town Planner, Punjab (respondent No.2) on 781994 who ordered that the petitioner shall stand retired with effect from 27.10.1994 (A.N.).
However, before that day could arrive, the petitioner made an application seeking to withdraw his request for voluntary retirement.
This application has been rejected by respondent No. 2 vide annexure P-5.
3.
The petitioner has assailed annexure P-5 on the ground of arbitrariness and absence of reasons.
The contention of the petitioner is that in terms of Rule 39 of the Punjab Civil Services (Premature Retirement) Rules, 1975, he had a right to seek withdrawal of the application for voluntary retirement before the expiry of notice period indicated by him in his original application and the competent authority was not vested with the discretion to decline the request of the petitioner.
The petitioner has pleaded that till 27.10.1994, relationship of master and servant existed between him and the Government and he had every right to withdraw his request for voluntary retirement.
4.
The writ petition has been opposed by the respondents who have pleaded that the petitioner is in the habit of making applications for voluntary retirement and the competent authority has rightly declined his request for withdrawal of the application dated 2671994.
The respondents have heavily relied on the language used in Rule 39 of the Rules of 1975 to contend that the mere making of an application for withdrawal of the request of voluntary retirement does not give a right to the government servants to claim continuance in service.
Respondents have pleaded that the competent authority has, after due application of mind, concluded that the petitioner, who is in the habit of submitting applications, for voluntary retirement, does not deserve to be continued in service.
5.
By placing reliance on the decision of the Supreme Court in Balram Gupta v. Union of India, AIR 1987 SC 2354, learned counsel for the petitioner argued that once the petitioner had made an application dated 6.10.1994 to withdraw his earlier application dated 2671994, it was the duty of respondent No.2 to allow withdrawal of the application submitted by the petitioner and that no discretion was available to respondent No.2 to refuse the request made by the petitioner.
The learned counsel argued that voluntary retirement from service is virtually a unilateral act of the employer intended to bring to an end to the relationship of master and servant for the purpose of active service and, therefore, the petitioner, who had earlier sought voluntary retirement, had a right to withdraw his request for voluntary retirement in spite of the fact that the order accepting his application was issued by respondent No.2 on 1781994.
6.
Learned AAG Punjab has brought to the notice of the Court that the petitioner's record of service is far from being clean and, therefore, there was every justification far respondent No.2 to decline his request for voluntary retirement.
Mrs. Tuli, learned AAG tried to substantiate her point by inviting Court's attention to the service record of the petitioner.
She also argued that the very conduct of the petitioners in submitting successive applications for voluntary retirement and then withdrawing the same is indicative of the fact that the petitioner is not interested in serving the Government and a person who does not have the intention to serve the government does not deserve any indulgence by the High Court in its exercise of discretion under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
7.
Rule 39 on which both the parties have placed reliance reads thus :-  ``39.
Government have decided that a Government employee may be allowed to retire voluntarily, if he has completed 20 years qualifying service and given proportionate pension and gratuity, keeping in view the policy of the Government of India, the following decisions have been taken to implement this decision :- (i) Government employees who have put in not less than 20 years qualifying service may, by giving notice of three months in writing to the appropriate authority, retire from service voluntarily.
The scheme is purely voluntary, the initiative resting with the Government employee himself.
The Government does not have the reciprocal right to retire Government employee on its own, under this scheme.
XX XX XX (vi)(a) a notice of voluntary retirement may be withdran subsequently only with the approval of the appropriate authority provided the request for such withdrawal is made before the expiry of the notice.
Notification, the 28th July, 1975.
Rule 3(a) at any time after an employee has years of qualifying service, he may, by giving notice of not less than three months in writing to the appropriate authority, retire from service.
(4) The employee, who has elected to retire under sub-rule (2) or sub-rule (3) and has given the necessary notice to that effect to the appropriate authority, shall be precluded from withdrawing his notice except with the specific approval of the appropriate authority: Provided that the request for withdrawal shall be made before the intended date of his retirement."
A look at the language used in this rule shows that a right has been conferred on the government servants to seek voluntary retirement after 20 years qualifying service.
This right of the government servant is not hedged with any condition except the condition of 20 years qualifying service.
Sub-Clause (iv) of Rule 39 gives a further right to the government servant to withdraw his request for voluntary retirement provided that such request is made before the expiry of notice period and is approved by the competent authority.
This shows that before the actual cessation of the relationship of master and servant with effect from the date of expiry of the notice period, the employee is at liberty to make an application for withdrawal of the request for voluntary retirement.
This right of the employee is, of course, dependent on the acceptance/approval of his request by the appropriate authority.
However, in what circumstances the appropriate authority may accept the request of the employee or decline the same, is not discernable from Rule 39.
Apart from the absence of any guidelines in the rules, learned counsel for the parties have not placed before this Court any administrative or executive instructions containing the guidelines for the exercise of the discretion by the competent authority under Rule 39(iv).
In the absence of such guidelines it was absolutely necessary for the competent authority to record reasons in support of its decision and convey the same to the petitioner.
Annexure P-5 is singularly laconic on this aspect.
In view of this, the rejection of the request made by the petitioner vide his application dated 6.10.1994 (Annexure P-5) has to be held as illegal.
8.
I would have given the appropriate relief to the petitioner for his reinstatement in service straightway, but keeping in view the fact that the petitioner had himself within a period of less than 7/8 months, submitted two applications for voluntary retirement, and then withdrew the same, I direct that the competent authority should reconsider the application submitted by the petitioner on 6.10.1994 and pass a fresh order within a period of 30 days of receipt of copy of this order.
In case the competent authority accepts the application of the petitioner, he shall become entitled to be reinstated in service with effect from 27.10.1994 and shall be entitled to consequential benefits.
In case the competent authority decides not to accept the request made by the petitioner, it shall pass a reasoned order and communicate the same to the petitioner.
The petitioner shall be at liberty to file fresh petition to challenge any adverse order which may be passed by the competent authority.
The writ petition is allowed in the manner indicated above.