GS Singhvi, J - Petitioner joined service with effect from 17.3.1966 in the erstwhile Punjab State Electricity Board on his appointment as Line Superintendent.
With the creation of State of Haryana and formation of the Haryana State Electricity Board, the services of the petitioner were allocated to the Haryana State Electricity Board (for short `the Board') with effect from 1111967.
Petitioner passed AMIE in November, 1972.
In accordance with the policy decision of the Board which finds selection in its order dated 681974.
(Annexure P-1), the petitioner became entitled to be promoted as Junior Engineer and on the higher posts against the quota reserved from the AMIE passed candidates.
Initially, benefits of this Policy decision was not given to the petitioner.
He was promoted as Assistant Engineer by order dated 19121977.
Subsequently, by an order dated 1291980, persons junior to the petitioner were given retrospective promotions as Assistant Engineers w.e.f.
1.10.1974.
The petitioner and a large number of other persons submitted representations.
Some writ petitions filed before this Court were also decided.
Petitioner too filed Civil Writ Petition No. 3957 of 1991 which was dismissed as premature.
2.
In compliance of the directions given by this Court and in accordance with its own policy, the Board issued order dated 18101991 promoting the petitioner as Junior Engineer w.e.f.
April, 1973.
This was followed by an order dated 29.5.1992 (Annexure P-9) promoting the petitioner as Assistant Engineer w.e.f.
1.10.1974.
The petitioner claims that with the grant of retrospective promotion given to him as Assistant Engineer, he has acquired eligibility to be considered for promotion as Executive Engineer, but his case has not been considered even though in cases of similarly situated persons benefit of promotion as Executive Engineers has been given to them.
Claiming that he has been subjected to discrimination, the petitioner has filed this petition and sought issue of a writ of mandamus to the respondent-Board to promote him as Executive Engineer.
3.
In its reply, the respondent-Board has come out with a case that the instructions issued by the Board vide letter dated 411977 for granting of seniority to AMIE qualified technical subordinates have been withdrawn and this action of the Board has been upheld by a learned Single Judge of this Court in Charanjit Singh Nanda and others v. HSEB, 1991(2) SCT 250 (SC) : 1991(1) RSJ 479.
This decision of the Board has also been upheld by a Division Bench, which dismissed the Letters Patent Appeal No. 1613 of 1992 on 481993.
Respondent has pleaded that although post of Assistant Engineer in the quota meant for AMIE qualified candidates was available, but due to administrative reasons, policy decision was taken in that regard only on 411977.
This was followed by order dated 1291980 (Annexure P-5).
At that time, the petitioner was not eligible for promotion as Assistant Engineer.
Subsequently, he was allowed promotion as Junior Engineer vide order dated 18101991 and then deemed date of promotion as Assistant Engineer w.e.f.
1.10.1974.
However, the last mentioned order has been kept in abeyance because the Board withdraw its policy decision as contained in Annexure P-1.
Respondent has made reference to Civil Writ Petition No. 4004 of 1992 (HS Mokha and others v. HSEB) and Civil Writ Petition No. 12464 of 1992 (SL Girdhar etc. v. HSEB) and has contended that seniority of the Assistant Engineers and the petitioner cannot be recast till the decision of these writ petitions.
It has also been stated that an order of status quo has been passed by the High Court in those petitions.
4.
I have heard Shri R.K. Chopra, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner.
No one has appeared on behalf of the respondent.
5.
During the course of hearing Shri Chopra made a statement that the two writ petitions of which reference has been made in paragraph 13 of the reply have since been dismissed as withdrawn in the month of October, 1993.
His sole argument is that when the petitioner has been treated as promoted on the post of Assistant Engineer w.e.f.
1.10.1974, he will be deemed to be holding the post of Assistant Engineer with effect from that date and has, thus, become entitled to be considered for promotion to the post of Executive Engineer as per his seniority and suitability.
Shri Chopra argued that the respondent - Board has unjustly withheld the promotion of the petitioner as Executive Engineer and in any case the so-called hurdle in the promotion of the petitioner now stands cleared with the decision of the writ petitions filed by HS Mokha and others as well as SL Girdhar and others.
6.
From the rival pleadings, it is clear that by orders (Annexures P-8 and P-9), the petitioner has been granted retrospective promotions as Junior Engineer -I as well as Assistant Engineer.
These retrospective promotions accorded to the petitioner will naturally give a right to him to be treated as Junior Engineer-I w.e.f.
April, 1973 and Assistant Engineer w.e.f.
1.10.1974.
Logically, the petitioner will be deemed to be holding the post of Assistant Engineer with effect from 1.10.1974 and he will be presumed to have gained experience on the post of Assistant Engineer on the basis of his deemed date of promotion.
The only obstacle in the promotion of the petitioner on the post of Executive Engineer has been shown to be the order of status quo passed in some writ petitions filed before this Court.
The plea of the respondent- Board is that on account of order of status quo, the petitioner's seniority in the cadre of Assistant Engineers could not be determined.
With the dismissal of those writ petitions, the Board is now under duty to determine the seniority of the petitioner in the cadre of Assistant Engineers and consider his case for promotion to the post of Executive Engineer.
Now there remains no reason for not considering the case of the petitioner for promotion as Executive Engineer.
Non-consideration of the petitioner for promotion even after October, 1993, cannot but be treated arbitrary and, therefore, contrary to `equality clause'contained in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
Therefore, this grievance of the petitioner deserves to be remedied by issue of a writ mandamus.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed.
The respondent is directed to fix the seniority of the petitioner in the cadre of Assistant Engineer within two months and consider the case of the petitioner for promotion to the post of Executive Engineer and grant him promotion according to his seniority and suitability subject, of course, to the availability of the vacancies.
This exercise shall be undertaken by the respondent - Board within a period of two months after the finalisation of seniority of the petitioner in the cadre of Assistant Engineers.
Costs made easy.