GS Singhvi, J (Oral) - Order Annexure P2 dated 2121991, whereby the Governor of Haryana extended the period of probation of the petitioner on the post of Programme Officer, as also the order Annexure P.6 dated 1361991, whereby the petitioner has been reverted from the post of Programme Officer to that of Child Development Project Officer, have been challenged in this writ petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as Child Development Project Officer on ad hoc basis with effect from 17.8.1982 in the Social Welfare Department of the Government of Haryana.
Her service was regularised in the cadre of Child Development Project Officers vide order dated 11385.
Thereafter the petitioner was promoted as Programme Officer vide order Annexure P.1 dated 2111989.
By Annexure P2 dated 2121991 the Governor of Haryana extended the period of probation of the petitioner for one year under rule 10(3)(b)(ii) of the Haryana Social Welfare Department and Relief Organisation Class II Service Rules, 1975 (for short '1975 Rules').
Against the order Annexure P2 the petitioner made a representation dated 1131991 and requested that the said order be withdrawn.
Subsequently, by Annexure P.6 dated 1361991 the petitioner has been ordered to be reverted from the post of Programme Officer to that of Child Development Project Officer.
3.
During the course of her working as Child Development Project Officer a number of enquiries were initiated against the petitioner.
In respect of an enquiry initiated vide Memo.
dated 1891987 issued under Rule 7 of the Punishment and Appeal Rules, which was subsequently converted into one under Rule 8 of the Punishment and Appeal Rules, order Annexure P4 was issued on 1651989 by the Director, Social Welfare, Haryana and the petitioner was punished with the penalty of `censure'.
In respect of Memo.
dated 1011991 issued under Rule 8 of the Punishment and Appeal Rules, the Director, Social Welfare, Haryana, passed the order dated 10.4.1991 and ordered recovery of a sum of Rs. 187563 from the pay of the petitioner.
Apart from these two punishments, two show-cause notices were issued to the petitioner in the year 1990 proposing action against her under Rule 8 of the Punishment and Appeal Rules.
In additional to the punishments and the disciplinary proceedings initiated against her, vide order dated 28.10.1990 she was suspended.
After over five months, she was reinstated vide order dated 311991.
4.
During the course of her working as Programme Officer, the petitioner was conveyed with advisory remarks in her annual confidential report for the year 1989-90 and adverse remarks in her annual confidential report for the year 1990-91 (Annexure P.7 and P.8).
Of course, in respect of the remarks made for the period between March, 1990 to November, 1990, the then Deputy Commissioner, Ambala, wrote a letter dated 171991 (Annexure P.9) to the Director, Social Welfare Department, Haryana, that he had made observations qua the petitioner because she was remaining away from the place of her work on account of the family circumstances and that otherwise there was no complaint regarding the work of the petitioner.
5.
Petitioner has questioned the order Annexure P2 on the ground that it has been passed in violation of Rule 10 of the 1975 Rules read with the administrative instructions issued by the Government of Haryana on 881989 vide Annexure P10.
Petitioner's assertion is that she had completed over one year's service as Programme Officer some time in May, 1990 and as no order for extending the period of her probation was issued in May, 1990 or immediately thereafter.
She will be deemed to have satisfactorily completed the period of probation in terms of Rule 10(3)(iii) and after satisfactory completion of the period of probation she could not have been reverted except by way of disciplinary action.
Order Annexure P6 has been assailed on the ground that it is punitive in character and also on the ground of arbitrariness.
Respondents have supported both the orders by pleading that the very promotion of the petitioner on the post of Programme Officer was tentative and was subject to the disciplinary proceedings pending against her and as soon as the proceedings were concluded, the competent authority took a decision not to continue the petitioner on the promoted post.
Further case of the respondents is that during the period of her working as Programme Officer, the petitioner had failed to give satisfaction.
Adverse remarks were conveyed to her for the years 1989-90 and 1990-91.
Otherwise also her performance had been adversely commented upon by the Additional Deputy Commissioner, Ambala, vide his letter dated 2251990 (Annexure R.3).
6.
First argument of Mr. Surya Kant, the learned counsel for the petitioner, is that the petitioner was appointed on probation for a period of one year commencing from the date of her joining in pursuance of Annexure P.1 and as no order for extending the period of probation was issued at the end of initial period of probation or within a period of three months of the expiry of the period of probation, the petitioner will be deemed to have satisfactorily completed the period of probation and will be deemed to have been confirmed on the post of Programme Officer.
According to the learned counsel, as a confirmed employee the petitioner could have been reverted from the post of Programme Officer to that of Child Development Project Officer only after an enquiry in accordance with the Haryana Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1981) and in no other manner.
Learned Assistant Advocate-General argued that the very promotion of the petitioner as Programme Officer was provisional in character and, therefore, it was a legitimate exercise of power by the Government to extend the period of probation after assessing the performance of the petitioner.
Ms. Bahri argued that during the period of her working as Programme Officer the petitioner had earned adverse reports and the Additional Deputy Commissioner had also made a complaint against her working and, therefore, the competent authority was fully justified in taking the view that the petitioner should not be confirmed on the post of Programme Officer and no declaration be granted about satisfactory completion of her probation.
7.
In order to appreciate rival contentions, it is useful to reproduce the order Annexure P.1 by which the petitioner had been promoted as Programme Officer.
This order reads -  "The Governor of Haryana is pleased to promote Smt. Asha Setia, Child Development Project Officer Hissar-I as Programme Officer (ICDS) in the pay scale of Rs. 2000-3200 on provisional basis subject to the condition :  (1) The promotion is approved by Haryana Public Service Commission (2) The decision of C.W.P.
No. 2490/1988 Smt. Vinod Sehgal v. State of Haryana, regarding finalisation of seniority of Smt. Vinod Sehgal, Child Development Project Officer.
This promotion is being made on the basis of tentative seniority and will be finalised only after the decision of the Court in the above mentioned case and also the decision of the pending disciplinary case against Smt. Asha Setia.
3.
The posting order will be issued later on.
Dated, Chandigarh  the 11489.
ASHA SHARMA  Commissioner & Secretary to Govt. Haryana, Social Welfare Department."
A look at the above quoted letter shows that the petitioner's promotion as Programme Officer was provisional.
It was subject to the approval by the Haryana Public Service Commission and decision of the C.W.P.
No. 2490 of 1988 - Smt. Vinod Sehgal v. State of Haryana.
It was also subject to reconsideration after the decision of the Court and the decision of the pending disciplinary cases against her.
This order nowhere speaks of the promotion of the petitioner being on probation.
Therefore, the petitioner cannot make a tall claim that she was appointed on probation without any condition and after the expiry of the period of one year she should be treated as confirmed or should be deemed to have satisfactorily completed the period of probation as no order extending the period of probation was issued by the competent authority.
From the very nature of the conditions incorporated in the order Annexure P.1 it is clear to me that the promotion of the petitioner on the post of Programme Officer was tentative in character and was subject to reconsideration in either of the following eventualities :  (1) Refusal of the Haryana Public Service Commission to approve her promotion.
(2) Finalisation of the seniority list in pursuance of the decision of the High Court in C.W.P.
No. 2490 of 1988.
(3) Decision of the pending disciplinary case.
No doubt, Annexure P2 is an order which indicates that even the Government had treated the promotion of the petitioner to be on probation.
Had the Government considered the promotion of the petitioner to be otherwise than on probation, there was hardly any occasion for it to have issued Annexure P 2.
Therefore, the matter will require a scrutiny on the premise that though promotion of the petitioner vide Annexure P.1 was provisional in character, she was treated to be on probation with effect from the date of her joining duty in pursuance of Annexure P.1.
8.
Rule 10 of the 1975 Rules deals with probation of persons appointed under those rules.
Rule 10(1) states that a person appointed on promotion shall remain on probation for a period of one year.
Rule 10(2) empowers the competent authority to terminate the service of a direct recruit and to revert a promotee in case the performance of such a direct recruit or promotee during the period of probation is not satisfactory.
Rule 10(3) speaks of the steps, which can be taken by these competent authority on completion of the period of probation.
One of the steps which can be taken by the competent authority is to declare that the probationer has successfully completed the period of probation.
Another step contemplated by Rule 10(3) (a) is that such a probationer can be confirmed if the competent authority forms an opinion that he has satisfactorily performed his duties during the period of probation.
Annexure P10 is a circular dated 881989 issued by the Chief Secretary to Government of Haryana on the subject of probation.
Para 3 of this circular postulates a decision by the competent authority within a period of three months on the issue of confirmation and/or extending the period of probation, In terms of this para, the competent authority is required to take a positive decision within a period of three months of the completion of the probation of a direct recruit as well as a promotee.
Argument of Mr. Surya Kant is that if within the period of three months of the completion of the period of probation no decision is taken by the competent authority for extending the period of probation, a probationer will be deemed to have satisfactorily completed the period of probation.
Mr. Surya Kant has heavily relied on para 3 of Annexure P10 in support of his contention that a decision regarding the extension of the period of probation has to be taken by the competent authority within a period of three months.
9.
After having given my most anxious consideration to the submission made by the learned counsel of the petitioner, I find no merit in it.
Rule 10(1) contemplates one year's probation for a promotee and ordinarily after the expiry of that period the competent authority is required to take a decision for confirmation of a person appointed on promotion or for extension of the period of his/her probation.
Proviso to Rule 10(3)(b) specifies the maximum period of probation which can be three years.
It can, therefore, be said that a person who is appointed on probation and continues to be on probation or is deemed to be continuing on probation for a period of three years acquires a right to be confirmed if no order contrary is passed by the competent authority within a period of three years or at the end of three years.
Law regarding confirmation of a probationer stands settled by the decision of the Supreme Court in State of Punjab v. Dharam Singh, AIR 1968 SC 1210; Paramjit Singh v. Ram Rakha, AIR 1979 SC 1073; and State of Gujarat v. Akhilesh C Bhargav, AIR 1987 SC 2135.
10.
However, the very fact that Rule 10(3) contemplates the maximum period of probation negatives the argument of the learned counsel that in the absence of a specific order by a competent authority within a period of three months after the expiry of the initial period of probation entitles a person to be confirmed in service or to be treated as confirmed or in any case entities him/her to a declaration that he has satisfactorily completed the period of probation.
Moreover, as has been held by the Supreme Court in Dhanjibhai Ramjibhai v. State of Gujarat, AIR 1985 SC 603, the competent authority is entitled to take a decision regarding extension of the period of probation or otherwise even after the expiry of the period of probation.
Therefore, contention of the learned counsel that the petitioner should be treated as confirmed or should at least be treated to have satisfactorily completed the period of probation after expiry one year's period some time in May 1990, has to be rejected.
11.
Second contention of the learned counsel is that the order of reversion passed by the respondents is punitive in character inasmuch as the competent authority has based the order of reversion on the orders of punishments passed against the petitioner for her working as Child Development Project Officer and before any punitive order could be passed against her it was imperative for the concerned authority to have made an enquiry against' the petitioner with a reasonable opportunity to her to defend herself.
The learned counsel argued that the order Annexure P.6 is not an order of reversion simpliciter but stigmatic in character.
Though in the first blush this contention of the learned counsel appears to be attractive but on a close scrutiny thereof shows that the same is without any merit.
Once again, I may refer to Annexure P 1 which shows that the promotion of the petitioner was subject to three conditions, one of which was a pending disciplinary case.
It is not in dispute that disciplinary proceedings pending against the petitioner concluded after her promotion as Programme Officer.
In one of the cases, the petitioner has been punished with 'censure'.
In another case an order of recovery from her has been passed.
In yet another case, a recorded warning was administered to her.
In addition to these punishments, the petitioner has earned one annual confidential report containing advisory remarks and the other one containing adverse remarks.
No doubt, Annexure P.9 considerably dilutes the adverse remarks contained in Annexure P.8 but it cannot be said that by taking into consideration the orders of punishment passed against the petitioner after her promotion as Programme Officer, may be that some of the charges relating to her working as Child Development Project Officer, the competent authority has in fact penalised the petitioner.
As the petitioner was treated to be on probation, it was incumbent on the competent authority to make an assessment of her work and performance during the period of probation.
Punishment awarded to an employee during the period of probation and adverse reports earned by him/her during that period certainly constitutes the source material on the basis of which an opinion can be formed by the competent authority about the satisfactory or unsatisfactory nature of the work done by the promoted officer.
Therefore, the mere fact that in Annexure P.6 a reference has been made to various orders of punishment passed against the petitioner and pending enquiries, it cannot be said that Annexure P.6 is founded on the element of misconduct.
In my considered opinion, the impugned order is an order of reversion simpliciter which has been passed by the competent authority on its forming an opinion that the petitioner has failed to give satisfaction during the period of probation.
Even otherwise, in view of the conditions incorporated in Annexure P.1 itself, it was open to the competent authority to review the case of the petitioner for promotion after the conclusion of the disciplinary case.
Therefore, making a reference to other disciplinary proceedings against the petitioner and Adverse reports earned by the petitioner cannot convert an order of reversion simpliciter into one of reversion brought about as a measure of punishment.
12.
Last argument of Mr. Surya Kant is that the respondents have arbitrarily relied on the work and performance of the petitioner and her conduct as Child Development Project Officer while assessing her work as Programme Officer for the purpose of taking a decision about her continuance as Programme Officer or reverting her.
In my opinion, this argument also merits rejection for the simple reason that Annexure P.1, the order of promotion of the petitioner, was made subject to the result of the disciplinary case.
That apart, the very fact that the Government had thought it proper to promote the petitioner despite the pendency of the disciplinary case against her is indicative of the fairness on the part of the Government.
The Government did not consider the disciplinary case pending against the petitioner as an obstacle to her promotion to the next higher post.
However.
the provisional promotion given to the petitioner did not have the effect of condoning all the acts of omission and commission which constitute misconduct, may be during her working as Child Development Project Officer.
The competent authority was, in my opinion, fully justified in taking into consideration the entire record of the petitioner for forming an opinion as to whether the petitioner should be allowed to continue on the post of Programme Officer as a probationer or should be reverted to the next lower post.
No other point was argued.
In the result, the writ petition fails and it is hereby dismissed.
13.
This order will, however, not result in denial of consideration to the petitioner for promotion on the post of Programme Officer with effect from the date her juniors have been promoted to the said post.
The petitioner shall be free to make a representation to the authorities for consideration of her case for promotion with effect from the date when her juniors were promoted during the pendency of the writ petition and if any such representation is made by her, it shall be the duty of the competent authority to consider the same and decide it on merits without being influenced by her reversion brought about by Annexure P.6 and the observations made in this order.
Petition dismissed.