GS Singhvi, J (Oral) - In this writ petition, a prayer has been made by the petitioner for issue of a direction to respondent No. 1 to consider her case for promotion to the post of Development Officer in spite of the pendency of vigilance case/criminal prosecution.
If the facts had not undergone material change during the pendency of the writ petition, it would have been necessary to pass a detailed order stating all the facts and contentions of the learned counsel for the parties, but in view of the facts that an important and material change has taken place during the pendency of the writ petition on account of quashing of the proceedings pending against the petitioner, the petition is being disposed of by a short order.
2.
The petitioner joined service as Lady Social Education Organiser in the year 1958 and was promoted as Lady Instructor in the year 1971.
She was sent on deputation as Instructor, Youth Coordinator with the Nehru Yuvak Kendra, Amritsar, which was being controlled by the Government of India.
She returned back from deputation in the year 1980.
An F.I.R. was registered against the petitioner on 21st of October, 1981 and after prolonged investigation and trial in respect of offences under Sections 409/447-A and 467 of the Indian Penal Code read with Sections 5(2) and 5(1)(d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, the petitioner was acquitted by the Court of Special Judge, CBI Patiala.
However, in his judgment dated 22nd August, 1991, the learned Special Judge gave a liberty to the competent authority to once again sanction prosecution of the petitioner.
A fresh sanction was issued for prosecuting the petitioner.
That has been quashed by the High Court in Criminal Misc.
Petition No. 14603-M of 1993 Amarjot Kaur v. State of Punjab, 1994(3) RCR(Crl.)
487 (P&H) decided on 30th August, 1994.
3.
During the pendency of the criminal proceedings the petitioner was allowed to cross Efficiency Bar on two occasions without prejudice to the case pending against her.
However, she was denied promotion to the higher post and her juniors were promoted one after the other.
After quashing of the proceedings by the High Court, vide order dated 30th of August, 1994, the Government issued order dated 24th November, 1994 (Annexure P-15) whereby the petitioner has been promoted Development Officer (Women Programme) with effect from 16th July, 1993.
4.
Short controversy which survives is as to whether the petitioner has a right to be considered for promotion from a date her junior was first promoted as Development Officer.
The argument of Mr. Nijjar is that the only ground on which the petitioner was denied fair consideration was the pendency of the criminal case against her and once criminal case has finally come to an end on August 30, 1994, the right of the petitioner for fair consideration which is protected by Article 16 of the Constitution of India and which was under cloud for the entire period of more than one decade, stands clearly established and a corresponding duty is imposed on respondent No. 1 to consider her case without being influenced by the fact that she was subjected to prosecution for her alleged involvement in various offices.
The learned Assistant Advocate-General, Punjab, could not point out any ground on the basis of which consideration for promotion to the higher post can be denied to the petitioner with effect from a date of promotion of her junior.
5.
In my considered view, as soon as the petitioner stands cleared of the allegations which constituted the foundation of the F.I.R. lodged against her in the year 1981, all prejudicial action taken against her which include denial of promotion to the higher post will have to be reviewed by the competent authority.
The petitioner's right to be considered independently of the criminal case stands revived with retrospective effect and, therefore, a direction deserves to be given for such consideration of petitioner's case.
6.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is allowed.
The respondent-Government is directed to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion as Development Officer and on other equivalent post on the basis of her record.
The petitioner's promotion shall be considered as per the criteria which was applied for consideration of the case of her juniors and if she is found suitable, order for retrospective promotion be issued with all consequential benefits including consideration for promotion to the next higher post.
This exercise should be undertaken and completed, by the respondents within four months from today.
Petition allowed.