Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - The petitioner had applied for the post of Social Study Mistress in response to the advertisement dated 1671974.
She was informed vide communication dated 221976, copy of which is Annexure P-3 to the writ petition, that her name had been placed in waiting list and the same had been sent to the Director, Public Instructions, Punjab, Chandigarh.
According to the petitioner, despite numerous requests having been made to the respondent-Department, she had not been given regular appointment and feeling aggrieved because of inaction on the part of the respondent Department, she filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, seeking direction to the respondents to offer her regular appointment.
2.
The case of the petitioner as set up in the writ petition is that at the time of filing of the writ petition, she was working against a leave vacancy in the respondent-Department and she had apprehension that her services were likely to be terminated at any time.
Thus, she filed present writ petition with a prayer that as an interim measure, her services may not be terminated.
3.
Notice of motion was issued on 141980 by a Division Bench of this Court and meanwhile stay of termination of services of the petitioner was also granted by the Bench by way of interim relief.
4.
The case was taken up on 2241980 and was then adjourned to 1651980.
On 1651980, the State counsel sought an adjournment for filing written statement.
The case was adjourned to 361980 and the interim order was directed to be continued.
On 1761980, writ petition was admitted as no written statement was filed even on that date and stay was confirmed.
5.
After admission of the case, the State filed written statement.
In reply to paras 10 and 19 of the writ petition, the State has taken the plea that the petitioner was working on vacant post (on leave arrangement) for a period of six months due to proceeding on maternity leave of Karamjit Kaur and the petitioner was relieved on 841980 from the said post.
As such question of continuity in service on the said post did not arise.
6.
I have considered the submissions of learned counsel for the parties and perused the paper book.
7.
From the perusal of the paper book, it is revealed that the stay was granted on 141980 by the Motion Bench but the petitioner was relieved from service on 841980 as the stay granted by the Motion Bench was not brought to the knowledge of the respondents.
The stay granted by the Court at the motion stage continued till 681992 i.e. till the final disposal of the writ petition.
The Court observed as under :-  ``After going through the record, I find that the stand of the respondent-State is correct and the petition in normal circumstances would perhaps have been dismissed.
It will be seen that the State sought a number of adjournments to file its reply and this not having been done, the Division Bench admitted that writ petition and directed the stay of termination of services to continue.
Be that as it may, it appears to me that the petitioner has been in service for almost 12 years and it would be most unjust for me to dismiss the writ petition and throw her out on the road as it is apparent to me that the experience gained by her fully justifies her continuance on the post in question.''
It is also observed from the paper book thereafter this judgment, the respondent-Department filed review application No. 49 of 1993 seeking review of the aforesaid order on the ground that the petitioner was not in service even after the stay was granted to the petitioner and as such the finding recorded therein was contrary to the facts.
Vide this Court's order dated 2151993, review application was allowed and the case was ordered to be listed for regular hearing.
9.
It is the admitted case of the petitioner that she was appointed as Social Study Mistress against a leave vacancy with a clear understanding that she was to be relieved on the availability of a permanent incumbent.
On joining of one Surinder Pal Kaur, the petitioner was relieved of her duties in pursuance of the order dated 841980, copy of which is Annexure P-4 to the writ petition, which was signed by the Head master, Government High School, Dhingi (Patiala).
In which School the petitioner was working and countersigned by the District Education Officer, Patiala.
The petitioner was relieved of her duties because of the fact that the stay granted by a Division Bench of this Court on 141980 was neither brought to the notice of the Head of the Institution in which she was working at that time nor to the notice of District Education Officer, Patiala.
After relinquishing the charge of the aforesaid post, the petitioner was appointed as a Teacher in SAS Nagar, Senior Secondary School, Mandi Gobindgarh with effect from 22.5.1980, where she is still working as is apparent from the experience certificate dated 3041993, copy of which is Annexure P-8 to the writ petition.
The petitioner having been relieved of the post, and subsequently taking up job in some other institution cannot claim regular appointment to the post of Social Study Mistress on the basis of the waiting list which was prepared in the year 1976.
For the foregoing reasons, the writ petition is dismissed being devoid of any merit.