AP Singh, J - By means of present writ petition, Shri Ram Gopal Sharma a Sanskrit Lecturer in D.A.V.
Inter College Agra (Subsequently the District of Firozabad was carved out and the College now falls in district Firozabad), has challenged the order dated 22.4.1983 of the Regional Deputy Director of Education, 1st Regional, Allahabad who has been impleaded as respondent No. 1.
2.
By the said order, respondent No. 1 has issued a direction by which Laiq Singh, respondent No. 4 was promoted as Sanskrit Lecturer in place of the petitioner.
3.
The necessary facts for resolving the controversy involved in the present writ petition are as follows :  The post of Sanskrit Lecturer fell vacant and an advertisement for filling up of that post was issued on 2091980 and 2101980 in two different newspapers.
In the advertisement, it was specifically mentioned that the post was reserved for the members of Scheduled Caste/Schcduled Tribe.
But, if no candidate from the said category was available, the post was to be filled from amongst the candidate of Background category.
4.
Applications in response to the advertisement were received in the office of the District Inspector of Schools, Agra (hereinafter called the Inspector).
No application was received from Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe candidates whereas only one application of respondent No. 4 was received from amongst the category of Backwards and large number of applications were received from the candidates of general category.
The Inspector sent the application of respondent No. 4 alone for selection before the Selection Committee constituted under the provisions of UP Intermediate Education Act, 1921 (hereinafter referred to as the Act).
The College was recognised educational Institution under the provisions of the Act and appointment on the post of Lecturer in the College could only be made under the provisions of the Act.
The Act requires constitution of Selection Committee for holding the Interview of candidates for appointment on the post.
The Selection Committee consisted of two experts nominated by the Inspector, Manager and Principal of the College.
The Selection Committee met on 1111981 and interviewed respondent No. 4 and unanimously resolved that respondent No. 4 was not suitable for appointment on the post of Sanskrit Lecturer.
The Selection Committee also held that the respondent was also over age.
5.
The proceedings of the Selection were signed by all the members of the Selection Committee which were sent to the Committee of Management.
The Managing Committee agreed with the findings of the Selection Committee and it transmitted the same for further action to the Inspector.
On receipt of the report of the Selection Committee, the Inspector sent seven applications on the basis of merit determined under Rule 10 of the Chapter II on the basis of quality point marks of candidates belonging to the General Category and fixed 121981 for holding of fresh selection by the Selection Committee for appointment on the post of Sanskrit Lecturer.
Thereafter it appears that the petitioner filed a representation before the Inspector against his non- selection by the Selection Committee on 1111981, whereupon the Inspector stopped the selection which he had fixed for 121981.
In his representation, petitioner alleged that he was entitled for relaxation of five years age from age restriction, as such his non-selection on the ground of being over age was not justified.
The Inspector submitted a report on 2411981 to the respondent No. 1 and sought his guidance on the points taken by respondent No. 4 in his representation and facts stated therein.
In the said reference letter dated 2411981 the Inspector further noticed that the provision regarding the age was that a candidate must be in the age limit 21 to 32 years, but the age limit was relaxable in respect of suitable candidate up to the age of 40 years.
But, the Inspector also gave the date of birth of the petitioner, as 8th September, 1939.
In the year 1980, when the post fell vacant, the petitioner was 41 years of age.
6.
The respondent No. 1 passed the order under challenge and held that respondent No. 4 was entitled to be selected on the basis of the qualify points marks awarded to him by the Inspector under Rule 10 and the marks awarded by the Selection Committee.
The respondent No. 1 was also of the view that the Selection Committee was wrong in not selecting the respondent No. 4.
He also held that selection committee has not given reason for not selecting the respondent No. 4.
It is noteworthy that respondent No. 1 completely ignored to consider the age factor which was one of the reasons on which the Selection Committee resolved not to select the petitioner.
In the counter-affidavit, respondent No. 4 has relied on notification dated 22.1.1981 and it has been contended that by virtue to said amendment, the respondent No. 4 was not over age and the selection committee should not have held him to be over age.
7.
Learned counsel for the petitioner reaised two arguments in support of the writ petition.
The first point urged by the learned counsel was that the respondent No. 1 had no power whatsoever to select respondent No. 4 who had been found unsuitable by the Selection Committee.
To elaborate the point further, learned counsel made two supplementary submissions in support of his first submission.
They are : (a) under the Scheme of the Act, the Selection Committee has the exclusive power to select a candidate if it finds the candidate suitable and obviously, it has power also to reject a candidate if it finds that the candidate interviewed by it is not fit and suitable for appointment; (b) the power of the Selection Committee has not been conferred on any of the authorities by way of appeal and in any case, the respondent No. 1 does not figure in the scheme of Act to review the decision of the Selection Committee and the order passed by him is without the authority of law.
The other point argued by the learned counsel for petitioner is that respondent No. 1 acted in utter breach of the principles of natural justice by not giving opportunity of hearing to the petitioner before directing for the appointment of respondent No. 4 on a post which was held by the petitioner consequent to his appointment on 25111981 under the Removal of Difficulties Order, 1981.
8.
On the other hand, Sri HN Singh and Sri BP Srivastva, who appeared respectively for respondent Nos. 3 and 4, argued that the respondent No. 1 acted within his power in passing the impugned order inasmuch as the matter regarding selection of Sanskrit lecturer was referred to him by the District Inspector of Schools on the representation filed by respondent No. 4.
It was also urged that the Selection Committee acted illegally in not exercising its function assigned to it under the provisions of the Act by nor selecting respondent No. 4 who happened to be the only eligible candidate available for appointment on the post being fully qualified for the appointment on the misceived ground of respondent No. 4 being unsuitable and over age.
It was also argued that since appointment of the petitioner was made in legally under the Removal of Difficulties 1st Order, 1981 and that too, only for a period of six months, he had no right to the post and the respondent No. 1 was not required to hear him before passing the impugned order and, therefore, the order under challenge should not be disturbed.
9.
Sri BP Srivastava, learned counsel has further argued that the petitioner has no locus standi for challenging the order of respondent No. 1 for the reasons that (i) he was not a candidate in the selection held for appointment on the post and (b) his appointment under the Removal of Difficulties Order, 1981 on 25111981 having been made only for six months and the said period having expired long back (before the order was passed by the respondent No. 1) and no fresh appointment of petitioner having been made, thereafter, by respondent No. 3, petitioner lost whatever little right he had in respect of the post of Sanskrit Lecturer of the College on expiry of the period of six months for which the petitioner was appointed.
10.
Before adverting to the points raised by the learned Counsel for parties, it is necessary to examine the Scheme of the Act and other relevant provisions of law.
11.
Section 16-E of the Act provides for selection of teachers and head of institutions.
Sub-section (1) provides that subject to the provisions of the Act, the Head of Institution and teachers of an institution shall be appointed by the Committee of management in the manner hereinafter provided.
Sub- section (2) provides for advertising the vacancy in at least two newspapers giving such particulars as may be prescribed and the newspapers must have adequate circulation in the State.
Sub-section (3) prohibits the appointment of a person as a head of Institution or teacher unless he possesses the minimum qualification prescribed by the Regulations framed under the Act.
The proviso allows the appointment of a person not possessed of the minimum qualifications provided exemption has been granted by the Board having regard to his education, experience and other attainments.
In sub-section (4), the applications for appointment in pursuance of the advertisement are required to be made to the Inspector which should be accompanied by fee which shall be paid in such manner as may be prescribed.
Sub-section 5(1) requires award of quality point marks as per the procedure prescribed in the regulation by the Inspector who is required to forward the applications to the Committee of Management.
Sub-clause (2) read with Regulation 10 provides that seven candidates in the order of merit shall be called for interview for appointment on each post and meeting of the Selection Committee shall be held in accordance with the Regulations for appointment.
Sub-section (6) provides that Selection Committee shall prepare a list containing in order of preference the names as far as practicable of three candidates for each post found by it suitable for appointment and, thereafter, it is required to communicate the same to the Committee of Management with its recommendations for appointment.
Sub-section (7) requires for appointment of first candidate by the Committee of Management whose name finds place at the top of the merit list and in case of his failure to join the post, the Managing Committee has to appoint the next candidate and process is to be completed unless one of the candidates whose name has been sent by the Selection Committee joins the post.
Sub-section (8) provides that if the committee of Management does not agree with the recommendations of the Selection Committee it shall refer the matter together with its reasons for disagreement to the Regional Deputy Director of Education in case of appointment of head of the institution and in case of appointment of teacher to the Inspector, and decision of the Inspector or Regional Deputy Director of Education has been made final.
Sub-section (9) provides that where no candidate approved by the Selection Committee of appointment is available, a fresh selection shall be held in the manner laid down in the Section.
Sub-section (10) provides for revisional powers of the State Government in case of Head of Institution and Director in case of teacher, the State Government in case of Principal or head of the institution and Director in the case of teacher have been authorised to cancel the appointment or to pass other consequential orders after hearing the person who has been selected or appointed on being satisfied that the appointment of any person as head of the institution of teacher was made in contravention of the provisions of the Act.
Sub-section (11) provides for short term appointments, which has no relevance for the purpose of the present case.
12.
Appointments on the post of Head of the Institution and teachers was stopped by order dated 8.4.1981 passed by the Director of Education, UP Allahabad which was followed by orders dated 1041981, 11.5.1981 and 491981, as hag been stated by the petitioner in para 8 of the writ petition.
This fact has not been denied in para 30 of the counter-affidavit in which reply of para 8 of the writ petition has been given.
These orders of the Director of Education has been issued in contemplation of the promulgation of the Ordinance No. 8 of 1981, namely, the UP Secondary Education Services Commission & Selection Board Ordinance, 1981, which completely over-hauled the procedure of appointment of Principal, Head of Institution and teachers up to lecturer and LT Grade and substituted an absolutely new procedure in place of the procedure provided under Section 16-E of the Act.
The Ordinance No. 8 of 1981 was replaced on its expiry by Ordinance No. 23 of 1981 and, thereafter, it was replaced by UP Act No. 5 of 1982, which is known as UP Secondary Education Services Commission and Selection Board Act, 1982 (hereinafter referred to as the Selection Commission Act).
13.
Section 3 of the Selection Commission Act empowers the State Government to establish a Commission to be called the 'Uttar Pradesh Secondary Education Services Commission'.
The said Commission has been made a body corporate and exercises powers throughout the State of UP which inter alia provides that it has to prepare a guideline relating to the method of recruitment and promotion of such Categories of teachers as are specified in the schedule to conduct examination where considered necessary hold interviews and make selection of candidates for being appointed as teachers, to select and invite experts and to appoint examiners for the purposes specified in clause (b), to make recommendations regarding the appointment of selected candidates and their promotion, to advise the management in matters relating to dismissal, removal or reduction of teachers specified in the Schedule.
14.
Under Section 11, the Commission is to prepare a panel of candidates selected by it.
The requirements in this respect are more or less same as are in Section 16-E of the Act.
Section 16 of the Selection Commission Act which is very important provides that notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the UP Intermediate Education Act, 1921 or the Regulations made therein, subject to the provisions of Sections 18, 21-B, 21-C, 21-D, 33 and 33-A, every appointment of teacher specified in the Schedule shall, on or after July 10th, 1981, shall be made only on the recommendation of the Commission.
Provision to Section 16, provides in respect of retrenched employee, which for the purpose of this case is not relevant.
Sub-section (2) provides that every appointment of a teacher made in contravention of the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be void.
15.
Section 18 of the Selection Commission Act contemplates for making of the ad hoc appointments of the teachers.
It provides that where the management has notified a vacancy to the Commission in accordance with the provisions of the Act and the Commission has failed to recommend the name of any suitable candidate for appointment as a teacher specified in the Schedule within one year from the date of such notification, or the post is vacant for more than two months, the management may appoint a teacher by direct recruitment or promotion on purely ad hoc basis from amongst the persons possessing qualifications prescribed under the U P Intermediate Education Act, 1921, or the regulations made thereunder.
Sub-section (3) of Section 18 provides the term of appointment made under Section (1) of Section 18, with which we are not concerned.
16.
Section 22 provides for imposition of penalty and punishment for appointment of teachers in contravention of the provisions of the Act.
Section 32 provides that provisions of the Act (UP Intermediate Education Act, 1921) and the regulations made thereunder in so far as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of the Act or Regulations made thereunder shall continue to be in force for the purpose of selection, appointment, promotion, dismissal, removal, termination or reduction in rank of a teacher.
17.
Section 33 of the Selection Commission Act provides that the State Government may, for the purpose of removing any difficulty, by a notified order, direct that the provisions of this Act shall, during such period as may be specified in the order have effect subject to such adaptation, whether by way of modification, addition or omission, as it may deem to be necessary.
The Schedule enumerates ( ? )
the posts to which the selection has to be made by the Selection Commission which includes the post of Lecturer of an Intermediate College, apart from Principal of such College, Head Master of a High School and LT Grade teacher.
Thus, the post of Sanskrit Lecturer is covered by the provisions of the Act and appointment on the post could only be made after 1071981 under the provisions of Selection Commission Act.
18.
As seen above, in Section 16 of the Selection Commission Act, appointment on the post of Sanskrit Lecturer after 1071981 could only be made by taking recourse to the provisions of the Selection Commission Act any not otherwise, Sub-section (2) specifically provides that every appointment made in contravention of the (sic) sub-section (1) were to be rendered void.
Similarly Section 22 of the Selection Commission Act provides for penalties for making appointment in contravention of the provisions of Selection Commission Act which may be imprisonment for three years or with fine which may be to the extent of five thousand rupees or with both.
19.
Under Section 33 of the Selection Commission Act, the State Government, issued the UP Secondary Education Service Commission (Removal of Difficulties) Order, 1981 (hereinafter referred to as the Removal of Difficulties Order).
20.
First order was issued on 31.7.1981, it provides for making of ad hoc appointments on the post mentioned in the Schedule under the Selection Commission Act till the time Selection Commission was not established under Section 3 of the Selection Commission Act and selected the candidates for appointments under Section 16 of the said Act.
21.
Para 2(a) of the Removal of Difficulties First Order provides that ad hoc appointments were to be made on substantive vacancies existing on the date of commencement of the order caused by death, retirement, and resignation, or otherwise.
Para 3 provides for duration of ad hoc appointments.
Clause (a) provides that the appointment was to be operative till the candidate recommended by the Commission joins the post whereas clause (b) provides that the appointment was to continue only for a period of six months.
Para 4 provides for ad hoc appointment by promotion and para 5 provides for ad hoc appointment by direct recruitment with which we are concerned, as there is no dispute in that respect.
Admittedly the petitioner was appointed as Sanskrit Lecturer on 25111981 by promotion for being the senior-most LT Grade teacher qualified for appointment on the post.
Para 6 provides for eligibility for appointment.
The qualification provided under the regulations framed under the Act have been made applicable.
Para 6(c) provides that the candidate sought to be appointed by promotion must have been serving the institution in substantive capacity from before the date of commencement of the order.
Para 7 provides for dispute to be referred to the Director.
22.
Another order was issued by the State Government on 1191981 which has no relevance in as much as same is in respect of procedure to be adopted for making short term appointment against short term vacancies.
On 3011981 third removal of difficulties Order was issued.
By paras 2 and 3 of this Order, para 3 of the Removal of Difficulties 1st Order (issued on 31.7.1981) was amended and it was provided that appointment of ad hoc teacher under para 2 was to cease to have effect after a candidate recommended by the Commission joins the post.
Clause (b) of 1st Removal of Difficulties Order was deleted by para 3 of this Order.
The result of this amendment was that the appointments made under the First Removal of Difficulties Order were to continue till a duly selected candidate by the Commission was appointed and joined the post.
23.
It is also necessary to examine the provisions exemption to which has been made in Section 16(1) of the Selection Commission Act.
Exemption in this provision has been made to appointments made under Sections 18, 21-B, 21-C, 21-D, 33 and 33A of the said Act.
Section 18, as mentioned earlier, relates to the powers of the management to make ad hoc appointments, if no selection had been made by the Selection Commission for a period of one year or the post had remained vacant for a period of two months.
Section 21-B requires the Inspector to prepare a list of Reserve Pool teachers, who had actually joined between January 9, 1978 and January 19, 1978 having been appointed to the post of a teacher in any institution in accordance with the provisions of the U.P.
High School & Intermediate College (Reserve Pool Teachers) Ordinance, 1978 (U.P.
Ordinance No. 10 of 1978) or the U.P.
High School & Intermediate Colleges (Reserve Pool Teachers) (Second) Ordinance, 1978 (U.P.
Ordinance No. 22 of 1978).
24.
Section 21-C relates to the powers of the Director to fill up the post of teacher by way of transfer and lastly Section 21-D requires the Inspector to issue appointment orders in respect of the Reserve Pool teachers in case Managing Committee has failed to issue appointment orders.
None of these provisions are relevant for the purpose of the present case.
25.
Now coming to the first submission of the learned counsel for the respondent No. 4 regarding maintainability of the writ petition, it is to be seen that petitioner's initial appointment on 2511981 under Removal of Difficulties 1st Order was made for a period of only six months and Inspector also by order dated 31.3.1981 approved the appointment only for a period of six months which was to come to an end on 20th May, 1982.
The Order of the Inspector in Annexure-2 to the writ petition.
The contention of the learned counsel for respondent that petitioner ceased to be ad hoc Sanskrit Lecturer of the College on the expiry of the period of six months as he was not subsequently appointed by the Managing Committee after 20th May, 1982, is not acceptable for the reason that by virtue of provisions of the Removal of Difficulties IIIrd Order issued by the Government under Section 33 of the Selection Commission Act on 3111982 the period of six months for which alone the ad hoc appointment could be made under the provisions of the Removal of Difficulties First Order automatically got extended and the appointment of the petitioner made under the Removal of Difficulties Ist order had necessarily to last till the candidate selected by the Selection Commission joined the post.
This position is borne out from the amendment of the Removal of Difficulties Ist Order by Clauses 2(1) and 3 of the Removal of Difficulties IIIrd Order.
The management (respondent No. 3), therefore, was not required to undertake the exercise of passing fresh orders for petitioner's appointment nor the Inspector was required to issue fresh approval for it.
It is not disputed that on the expiry of initial period of six months from 2511981 petitioner continued to work and remained posted as Sanskrit Lecturer of the College and was also paid his salary thereafter.
This position continued till the appointment of respondent No. 4 by the management (respondent No. 3) under the impugned order of respondent No. 1.
Admittedly, thus far no candidate has been selected for appointment by the Selection Commission nor such a candidate has joined the petitioner's appointment made under Removal of Difficulties Ist Order still survives.
26.
It is no doubt true that a post was created on petitioner's right to continue on the post which he held on account of the appointment of respondent No. 4 on the post consequent to the passing of the impugned order by respondent No. 1 but the petitioner remained posted and continued to work as Sanskrit Lecturer of the College after obtaining stay order from this Court in the present writ petition and he is still working in that capacity.
27.
Petitioner thus having duly been appointed under the removal of Difficulties First Order as ad hoc Sanskrit Lecturer and no appointment having been made on that post under Section 16 of the Selection Commission Act of a candidate selected by the Selection Commission, petitioner has a sub-stantive right of continuance on that post and on that basis, he had every right to challenge the impugned order of respondent No. 1.
I, therefore, hold that the present writ petition, filed at the instance of the petitioner, is not liable to be thrown out on the ground of want of locus standi of the petitioner.
The argument of the learned counsel for respondent No. 1 that petitioner had no locus standi to file the present with petition is, therefore, rejected.
28.
Now I take up the first point urged by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the Selection Committee and not the respondent No. 1 is competent to select a candidate for appointment of a teacher in.
the College under the Scheme of UP Intermediate education Act.
It has further been emphasised on petitioner's behalf that respondent No. 1 has no role whatsoever in the matter of Selection of teacher under the Act except in a case of reference by the managing committee as contemplated by S. 16E (8) of the Act.
It has been argued that no reference having been (made) by the Managing Committee under S. 16-E(8) of the Act to the Inspector, the respondent No. 1 had no jurisdiction to pass the impugned order, even on the reference of the District Inspector of Schools, on the application/representation of respondent No. 4.
It was further argued that in any case, respondent No. 1 could not pass the order without affording opportunity of hearing to the petitioner which admittedly was not done by him.
29.
This argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner has been refuted by the learned Counsel for the respondents who contended that since the Inspector found difficulty in deciding the mater himself, he rightly referred the matter to respondent No. 1 who passed a just and proper order and therefore, it cannot be said that the order of respondent No. 1 is without jurisdiction.
It is further argued that respondent No. 1 was not at all obliged to hear the petitioner as the petitioner had no right to the post as he was wrongly appointed on the post under the Removal of difficulties 1st Order.
Firstly, because the respondent No. 4 stood selected automatically for being the only candidate for appointment on the post before the Selection Committee for the reason of being fully qualified for appointment on the post and secondly, that the petitioner was not qualified and eligible for promoting in the Lecturers grade on the post of Sanskrit Lecturer as he was not the senior most LT Grade teacher of the College, who alone could be promoted under the provisions of the Act and the Removal of Difficulties 1st Order.
Procedure for appointment of teacher under S. 16-E has been dealt with in detail above.
Under the provisions of S. 16-E read with Regulation 10 of the Regulations framed under Chapter II, the Inspector is required to send names of at least seven candidates in the order of merit prepared on the basis of quality point marks awarded under his supervision and the Selection Committee has the power to prepare a list of at least three candidates for appointment in the order of merit.
On the basis of the said provision, it has been argued by the learned counsel for respondents that Selection Committee has only to prepare a list of three suitable candidates in the order of merit, it has no power to reject a candidate on the ground of suitability for the post if the candidate is qualified for the appointment on the post.
It is further argued that if there is only one candidate for appointment on the post, the Selection Committee has no option in the matter and is bound to recommend his name for appointment to the managing committee.
30.
I am afraid, I cannot accept this contention.
No doubt, there is no express power given to the Selection Committee to reject a candidate on the ground of unsuitability but the fact remains that the Selection Committee is required to Judge the merit and suitability of the candidate who appears before it for appointment on the post for which Selection is being held.
The Selection Committee is not expected to close its eyes and mechanically recommend the name of that candidate for appointment to the Managing Committee.
If the suggestion made by the learned Counsel for respondents is accepted, the provision for selection will lose its efficacy and selection will no more be a selection.
Selection in itself inheres judging of merit and suitability.
It will become self destructive if the body entrusted with the job of making selection is reduced to the job of making mechanical recommendation in the situation where the things are manipulated to produce only one candidate before it for selection.
The scheme of the S. 16-E and Regulation 10, which is supplementary to it, on the other hand suggests a wholly contrary position.
No selection should take place until seven candidates have applied and seven names are sent for selection by the Selection Committee by the Inspector and the Selection Committee has to prepare a panel of three names in the order of merit after holding the Selection and judging suitability.
31.
In the present case, I am not called upon to express my views as to the legality of the selection of a lone candidate available for appointment before the Selection Committee as that situation did not arise in the present case.
I, therefore, refrain from expressing my views on that aspect but I cannot accept the contention of the learned Counsel for the respondents that the Selection Committee is bound to select if there is only one candidate before it, who answers the requisite qualifications and it has no option left for judging his suitability for appointment on the post.
The argument, therefore, must be rejected as preposterous.
The Selection Committee, as per the Scheme of the provisions referred to above, has as of necessity to Judge the suitability of the candidates of (or) the lone candidate who may appear before it for appointment, and if it finds that the candidate who, although possesses all the requisite qualifications necessary for appointment is otherwise not suitable for appointment on the post it has full powers to reject that candidate.
The Selection Committee in the present case unanimously decided that the petitioner was unsuitable for appointment on the post.
The Selection Committee was, therefore, within its powers to take that decision.
32.
There is no allegation of bias against the members of the Selection Committee of the respondent No. 1 has made any such suggestion in this regard in the impugned order, in the circumstances, the respondent No. 1 had no justification to question the decision of the Selection Committee which was endorsed by the Managing Committee also.
It is, therefore, not possible to accept the contention that when there is only one candidate and the candidate is found qualified for appointment on the post.
The Selection Committee is bound to recommend his name for appointment.
33.
Second limb of the argument of the learned Counsel for the petitioner is that the respondent No. 1 has no role in the matter of selection of teacher except on a reference made to the Inspector by the Managing Committee under S.16-E(8) of the Act.
Admittedly in the present case, the Managing Committee did not make the reference to the Inspector under S.16-E(8) of the Act.
The matter reached the Inspector and then to the respondent No. 1 on the representation filed by respondent No. 4 before the District Inspector of Schools.
The Inspector too had no jurisdiction to entertain the representation of the petitioner under S16-E(10) of the Act.
The petitioner could file a representation only before the Director and not before the Inspector or before the respondent No. 1.
Admittedly, no representation was filed by respondent No. 4 before the Director of Education.
The respondent No. 1 could not at all decide the validity of the Selection on the representation filed by respondent No. 4 before the Inspector.
Nor the Inspector had the power or authority to refer the matter (representation of respondent No. 4) to the respondent No. 1 for seeking guidance.
Thus, the impugned order passed by respondent No. 1 on the representation of the petitioner referred to him by the Inspector is not within the scheme of the Act and is there liable to be quashed.
34.
The third limb of the argument of the learned counsel for petitioner also deserves to succeed.
The petitioner had already been appointed as Sanskrit Lecturer under the Removal of Difficulties Ist Order.
By virtue thereof petitioner had a valid claim on the post.
It was, therefore, necessary for the respondent No. 1 to afford an opportunity of hearing to the petitioner before issuing the direction for the assortment of some one else (respondent No. 4) it was incumbent for the respondent No. 1 to have given an opportunity of hearing to the petitioner which admittedly was not done, for this reason also, the writ petition is liable to succeed and order of respondent No. 1 deserves to be quashed.
35.
The last limb of the argument of the learned counsel for petitioner was that the respondent No. 1 himself could not declare respondent No. 4 as having been selected.
In other words, respondent No. 1 could not exercise the powers of the Selection Committee.
This argument of the learned Counsel for petitioner is not required to be decided in this case in view of the decisions on other points argued in the case on petitioner's behalf which alone are sufficient to sustain the relief prayed foe by the petitioner.
36.
There is another aspect of the matter, which has totally been ignored by respondent No. 1, while passing the impugned order for the appointment of respondent No. 4.
The Selection Commission Act came into force on 1071981.
The impugned order was passed by respondent No. 1 on 22.4.1983.
Under the orders of the Director of Education issued earlier to this date as well as under S. 16 of the Selection Commission Act, no appointment on any of the posts specified in the Schedule appended to the Selection Commission Act, could be made by the management except on the recommendation of the Commission.
Exception however to this mandatory requirement of S. 16(1) (a) of the Selection Commission Act, as seen in the earlier part of this judgment, initially was in respect of appointments made under Ss.
18 and 33 of the said Act and none else.
However, subsequently, the appointment made under Ss.
21-B, 21-C, 21-D and 33-A were also exempted from the mandatory requirement of S. 16(1) (a).
37.
The appointment of the petitioner by the Managing Committee on the direction of the respondent No. 1 which is under challenge in the writ petition does not fall in any of the Sections to which exemption has been made by S. 16 of the Selection Commission Act.
The impugned order passed by respondent No. 1 for appointing respondent No. 4 on the post of Sanskrit Lecturer of the College and consequent appointment of respondent No. 4 by the Managing Committee of the College, is therefore, void for being in breach of the provisions of S. 16(1) (a) of the Act.
38.
After the impugned order was passed by respondent No. 1, the Inspector by letter dated 1851983 (Annexure-C.A.
6 to the counter-affidavit filed by respondent No. 4) directed the Managing Committee to appoint respondent No. 4 on the post of Sanskrit Lecturer.
In paras 18 and 19 of the counter affidavit, it has been stated that Managing Committee whereafter held its meeting on 19.5.1983 and issued an appointment order in favour of respondent No. 4 on 2051983, appointing the respondent No. 4 as Sanskrit Lecturer, whereupon as stated in para 12 of the counter-affidavit, the respondent No. 4 joined the post on 2051983, however, on account of the stay order granted by this Court, petitioner is still continuing on his post of Sanskrit Lecturer.
The appointment of respondent No. 4 as Sanskrit Lecturer, in my opinion, is hit by the provisions of S. 16(2) of Selection Commission Act as it was an appointment contrary to the provisions of S.16(1) of the Act.
The appointment of respondent No. 4 made by the Managing Committee is, therefore, void ab initio and has no effect on the right of the petitioner to continue as Sanskrit Lecturer of the College.
39.
It was argued by the learned Counsel for respondent that petitioner not being qualified for promotion as Sanskrit Lecturer, his appointment itself was illegal and he has no right to continue on the post of Sanskrit Lecturer.
40.
In paras 15 to 17 of the counter-affidavit, it has been alleged that promotion of respondent No. 4 as Sanskrit Lecturer was illegal and it was made against the Rules.
It is not the case of respondent that the order of the Inspector according approval of petitioner as ad hoc Sanskrit Lecturer and the Removal of Difficulties Ist Order had been rescinded, until the appointment of petitioner as ad hoc Sanskrit Lecturer is rescinded or cancelled after giving opportunity of hearing to him, the right of respondent No. 4 to continue on the post cannot be questioned.
Of course, the right of petitioner to continue on the post is subject to the appointment of selected candidate by the Selection Commission.
This argument of the learned counsel for the respondent, therefore, has no substance.
41.
The result of the above discussion is that respondent No. 4 was wrongly and illegally appointed as Sanskrit Lecturer in the College by the respondent No. 3 on the orders of respondent No. 1 and the Inspector.
The petitioner was lawfully appointed as ad hoc Sanskrit Lecturer under the Removal of Difficulties First Order and he has a vested right to continue on the post till his appointment is cancelled in accordance with law after affording opportunity of hearing to him or till an appointment is made under S. 16(1) of the Selection Commission Act on the recommendation of the Commission.
42.
In the result, the writ petition succeeds and is accordingly allowed.
The impugned order dated 22.4.1983 is quashed.
The appointment of respondent No. 4 on the post of Sanskrit Lecturer of the College by order dated 2251983 (Annexure-8 to the counter-affidavit of respondent No. 4) and the order of the same date filed as Annexure-9 cancelling the appointment of petitioner are also quashed.
The respondents are restrained from interfering in the working of the petitioner as Sanskrit Lecturer of the College till the promotion of the petitioner on that post is cancelled after affording opportunity of hearing to him or till an appointment is made on that post in favour of a candidate duly selected by the Commission under the provisions of Selection Commission Act.
Petition allowed.