GR Majithia, J - This judgment disposes of Civil Writ Petition Nos13777 and 13470 of 1989.
2.
The petitioner has impugned notification No. SC 45/C.A.11/48/S.5/89, dated April 27, 1989 issued under section 5(1) (B) of the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 (for short, the Act,), in these writ petitions under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
3.
Through the impugned notification, notice was given that proposal had been made for prescribing minimum rates of wages for the Scheduled employments.
Notification postulated that any person aggrieved against the fixation of minimum wage could file representation.
After hearing the objections, the State Government vide notification No. S.O.
82/CA11/48/S5/80, dated September 18, 1989 fixed the minimum wage for the scheduled employments.
4.
In response to the notice of motion issued by this Court, written- statement has been filed on behalf of the official respondents.
The positive stand had been taken that the petitioner did not file any suggestion/objection against the proposal published vide notification, dated April 27, 1989.
A large number of workers were being paid revised wages as fixed by the State government vide notification, dated September 18, 1989.
It is further stated that the ACT IS A SOCIAL welfare legislation.
Under the Directive Principles of the State Policy of Constitution of India, the State Government has to provide by suitable legislation to all workers agricultural/industrial a living wage.
The Punjab Government had linked the minimum wages with consumers price Index Number by taking average of all the centres which were compiled by Economic Adviser to Government of Punjab.
Thus, the minimum wages were fixed/revised by the government in order to avoid exploitation of unrecognized labour.
5.
We do not find that the minimum wage fixed suffers from any infirmity.
apart from this, the apex Court in Ministry of Labour & Rehabilitation and another v. Tiffin's Barytes Asbestos & paints Ltd and another, AIR 1985 Supreme Court 1391 has laid down that notification fixing minimum wages are not to be lightly interfered with under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
It will be relevant to reproduce the following observations :  "We also wish to emphasise the notifications fixing minimum wages are not to be lightly interfered with under Article 226 of the Constitution on the ground of some irregularities in the constitution of committee or in the procedure adopted by the committee.
It must be remembered that the committee acts only as a recommendary body and the final notification fixing minimum wages has to be made by the Government.
A notification fixing minimum wages, in a country where wages are already minimal should not be interfered with under Article 225 of the Constitution except on the most substantial of grounds.
The legislation is a social welfare legislation undertaken to further the Directive Principles of State policy and action taken pursuant to it cannot be struck down on mere technicalities."
For the reasons stated above, we find no merit in the writ petitions and dismiss the same.
Order accordingly