SK Jain, J - Vide Civil Suit No. 182 of 1987 instituted on 2051987, Pritam Singh who was working as Conductor in the Punjab Roadways at the relevant time sought a decree of declaration to the effect that order dated December 26, 1986 passed by the General Manager, Punjab Roadways, Depot No. 1, Jalandhar, thereby stopping his four increments with cumulative effect was illegal being against the mandatory provisions of Punjab Civil Services (Punishment & Appeal) Rules, 1970.
After contest the State, the suit was dismissed by the Sub-Judge Ist Class, Jalandhar, vide his judgment and decree dated December 26, 1989.
The plaintiff challenged the above said judgment and decree vide R.C.A.
No. 207 of 28.9.1989.
The learned Additional District Judge, Jalandhar vide his judgment and decree dated 7.8.1990 reversed the findings of the trial Court and decreed the suit of the plaintiff.
The State has come up in this Regular Second Appeal impugning the above said judgment and decree of the First Appellate Court.
2.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and considered the pleadings of the parties evidence adduced in the suit and the judgments of both the Courts below.
I do not find any fault with the well reasoned judgment of the First Appellate Court.
3.
The charge-sheet when translated into English would read somewhat as under :-  "That on 24/12/85 you were on duty with bus No. 2221.
Your bus was checked by Sarvshri Baldev Singh, Bodha Nand Sharma, Ram Singh and Mohan Lal, Inspector at 19.45 P.M. at Tosa while going from Jalandhar to Ropar.
Only 27 passengers were travelling in the bus.
Out of them 13 passengers were without tickets.
You have charged the fare but tickets were not issued to them.
Nine passengers were travelling from Nawansahar to Ropar from whom you have charged Rs. 3150.
You have charged Rs. 410 from two passengers travelling from Balachaur to Ropar and Rs. 240 from two passengers travelling from Kathgarh to Ropar.
In this way you collected Rs. 38/- from 13 passengers and had not issued tickets to them.
You admitted your fault in the presence of the passengers and handed over the unpunched tickets.
In this way, you have been found guilty for committing embezzlement of Government money to the tune of Rs. 38/- and you have been found guilty for violating the rules while on duty.
That you, Pritam Singh C-143, are required to submit the reply within a period of 15 days from the date of receipt of this letter as to whether you admit the charges levelled against you or whether you want to make any statement or produce defence or want to be heard personally.
That you, Sh. Pritam Singh C-143, are further informed that if you want to inspect any document/record, for preparing your written reply, you can inspect the same during the office hours in the office of General Manager, Punjab Roadways, Jalandhar-I You are also informed that you will be shown only the documents concerning your case and these documents are available in the office of the General Manager, Punjab Roadways, Jalandhar-I You are also made clear that in case you do not inspect these documents it will not be taken any valid reason in this case.
In case the detail in writing does not reach the office of the General Manager, Punjab Roadways, Jalandhar-I within the stipulated period, then it will be presumed that you do not want to say anything in your case.
In case your reply is not received within the stipulated period, ex-parte proceedings will be initiated against you."
Translation of the charge-sheet has been reproduced above.
The enquiry report has also been carefully examined by me.
4.
From the perusal of the above charge-sheet, it is clear that it is not in accordance with the provisions of Rule 8(3) of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Rules').
Inasmuch as : (1) the substance of the imputation of misconduct and misbehaviour has not been drawn into definite and distinct articles of charges.
Guilt of the delinquent official under each head had not been specifically mentioned in specific paragraph in the charge-sheet.
There ought to have been a definite article of charge for each of the three allegations levelled against him as laid down in Rule 8(3) (1) of the Rules (ii) a statement of imputations of misconduct or misbehaviour in support of each article of charge has not been drawn because a statement of all relevant facts has not been given therein as to how and what rules had been violated by him.
Therefore, it can conveniently be said that the provisions of Rule 8(3) of the Rules have not been complied with while framing the charge-sheet.
5.
It is now well settled that a disciplinary enquiry has to be a quasi-judicial enquiry held according to the principles of natural justice and the enquiry officer has a duty to act judicially.
Perusal of the enquiry report would reveal that it has not been prepared in accordance with the provisions of Rule 8(23) of the Rules inasmuch as it does not contain the articles of charge and the statement of imputation of misconduct and misbehaviour distinctly.
The Supreme Court in Sawai Singh v. State of Rajasthan, AIR 1986 SC 995 has been pleased to hold that where the charges framed against the delinquent officer were vague and no allegations regarding it have been made by him before the enquiry officer or before the High Court, the fact that he has participated in the enquiry would not exonerate the department to bring home the charges.
The enquiry based on such charges would stand vitiated being not fair, and further that the report of the enquiry officer finding the delinquent official guilty could not be sustained as the charges were vague and it was difficult to meet the charges fairly by the delinquent official.
The case in hand is squarely covered by the abovesaid judgment.
6.
Perusal of the enquiry report further reveals that there is no legal and valid evidence before the enquiry officer for having come to conclusion that the third charge, namely, the plaintiff having charges Rs. 240 paise from the two passengers allegedly travelling from Kathgarh to Ropar had been proved.
Admittedly, there is nothing on the record to show that the un-punched tickets and the cash with the conductor had been tallied and then it was found out that how many tickets had been issued by the delinquent official.
None of the four Inspectors who conducted the raid had even referred to the un-punched tickets collected by them from the delinquent official.
Strangely enough, he disbelieved the statement of the witnesses produced by the department on two counts but conveniently believed them on the third count.
7.
In view of the above discussion, I do not find any fault with the concurrent findings of fact recorded by the two Courts below which are hereby confirmed.
Resultantly, this appeal fails which is hereby dismissed with costs.