DP Wadhwa, J - The petitioner, a girl student, seeks mandamus directing the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner and allow her to join as apprentice in accordance with the policy as laid down along with other candidates selected in the year 1992.
2.
The respondent-Life Insurance Corporation of India (LIC for short) is a body corporate established under the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956.
It is not disputed that it is amendable to writ jurisdiction of this Court.
An advertisement appeared in the daily newspapers issued by the Directorate of Education, Delhi, stating that the Directorate of Education, Delhi, offered a job linked vocational course in Life Insurance at +2 stage in Vocational stream in certain schools.
The advertisement further said as to how admission to this course would be given to the students.
The salient features of the course which had been introduced in collaboration with LIC and the Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE) with a view to implement the National Policy on Education with reference to Vocationalisation of Education provided : (i) the pass-outs of this course will be absorbed in LIC subject to the approval of Board of Governors and employment regulations presently in force in LIC; (2) students who will secure grade B2 and above in vocational subjects will be appointed in LIC only subject to an interview and Medical examination; (3) students who secure grade C1 and C2 shall be allowed to compete with general candidates in the entrance examination for employment in LIC; (4) the above provisions shall be subject to the conditions that the total number of vacancies allowed for the vocational stream pass-outs shall not exceed 25% of the net vacancies after making necessary provisions for reservations for SC/ST, Ex-servicemen and others; and (5) the vocational pass-outs subjects to the conditions above will be absorbed as apprentices initially for one year after which will be taken as Probationary Assistants.
However, the total emoluments payable to the apprentices shall be equal to the minimum of the Assistant Grade.
The petitioner passed her 10th Class Examination of CBSE in the year 1989 securing 656% marks in aggregate.
As per the scheme as aforesaid the petitioner got admission into vocational course at +2 level for Life Insurance in the Govt.
Girls Senior Secondary School, Timarpur, Delhi-7.
She appeared in the Senior Secondary Examination (+2) of CBSE in the year 1991 and passed the examination, but out of three subjects, in one relating to Life Insurance she secured C1 Grade.
She reappeared in that paper again as per Rules of CBSE and improved her performance and she secured Grade A1 in this paper which was above B2 Grade as prescribed.
The petitioner says that she fulfilled all the criteria as laid down by the LIC but she has been denied the job as apprentice.
This led to filing of the present petition.
3.
The main contention of the respondent-LIC is that the petitioner does not fall in this scheme inasmuch as she did not get B+ Grade or above in Life Insurance paper in the first attempt.
4.
On the basis of the scheme formulated by the LIC, CBSE made a vocational stream under which one of the subjects is Life Insurance.
It is mentioned that vocational course in Life Insurance is job-oriented and guarantee placement in the industry concerned.
All those students who passed +2 level of CBSE under Life Insurance stream with B2+ are entitled to be selected as Apprentice Assistant and the only requirement in their interview and medical examination.
Under the rules of the CBSE the petitioner improved her performance when earlier in the paper of Life Insurance she was graded below B2+, but now after her improvement she secured Grade A1.
It is contended that when the CBSE itself provided for improvement of grade, LIC could not go behind this simply on the ground that the petitioner did not get the grade in the first attempt.
It is stated this is no way so provided.
As noted above, contention of the LIC is that there is a policy that a candidate must get B2+ in the first attempt to come within the scheme.
LIC has contended that in some similar matter this court did not grant any relief to the petitioners therein.
We sent for those files which were mentioned to us and these were C.W.P.
No. 2321/92 and C.W.P.
2167/92.
In the common order disposing of these two petitions the court recorded that main grievance of the petitioners was that number of marks for interview were very high thereby they were diluting the results of written papers, and secondly, the petitioners wanted appointment in Delhi and would not like to be posted elsewhere.
In the concluding para of the order the court recorded submission of Mr. Sethi, learned counsel for the LIC, where he said "according to the revised list if any further appointment letters are to be issued, it will be done within a fortnight but this will not apply to those candidates who have improved their marks after the improvement test, for whom a separate scheme has been promulgated by the respondent."
The court did not comment on this.
5.
LIC has stated that as a matter of policy which is being applied without any discrimination it has been laid down that students to be eligible for being appointed as apprentice trainee should have obtained the requisite grade or marks in the first attempt itself, the petitioner not having obtained requisite grade in the first attempt itself has no case and ineligible for being appointed as apprentice trainee.
We asked the LIC to produce the policy.
What we find is it has not been made known to anyone as it does not find mention in any of the circulars issued by the LIC.
We have been shown a letter dated 12 September 1992 from the P Executive Director, LIC, to Zonal Office of LIC, New Delhi, with reference to earlier writ petitions mentioned above.
It appears, this letter was written on certain points raised by the Advocate of LIC, and this letter is as under :-  "This has reference to your fax message dated 10992.
The details of the proposed briefing to our Advocate, Delhi in the above case has been perused by us and we agree with the points 1 and 5 stated in the above fax.
Regarding point No. 6 on Improvement Trust the decision of the Competent Authority is given here below :-  1.
Candidates who appear in part shall be considered under "Test Category" only.
2.
All candidates eligible as per the minimum prescribed grades shall be allowed to appear for the Test.
3.
Clause 6(vi) of the Recruitment Instructions shall not apply to the vocational course students.
The advocate may be briefed suitably."
6.
Then we were also shown a letter dated 7 September 1992 addressed by Executive Director (Personnel), LIC, to its Regional Manager, New Delhi, wherein it is mentioned in the last para as under :-  "As regards "Improvement Test", we may allow students who had taken full examination and have attained the desired standard/grade under Non-test category.
Those who pass in part have to go under "Test category."
7.
It was strenuously argued by Mr. Sethi that since the petitioner did not fall in the scheme and did not pass examination getting eligible grade, she could not be given any advantage for having secured better grade after improving her performance.
He said if that could be so then every student would improve his or her performance because then he or she will have to appear only in one paper devoting whole of the time for preparation for that.
We do not think that the stand of LIC is correct.
The order in two writ petitions mentioned above does not support the arguments advanced before us.
There is Senior School Curriculum issued by the CBSE relating to All India Examination for the year 1991.
It provides that a candidate can improve his/her performance in any paper.
In the vocational stream as prescribed it is clearly mentioned that vocational courses in Life Insurance, General Insurance and Railway Commercial are job-linked and guarantee placement in the industry concerned, subject to fulfilment of the rules/regulations and conditions laid down for the purpose by their respective organisations.
LIC issued a general circular to all its Zonal Offices stating that CBSE in collaboration with LIC had agreed to introduced Life Insurance as an exclusive stream under vocational stream at +2 level of CBSE.
This circular said that CBSE shall locate certain number of schools where certain number of candidates will be admitted and that students seeking admission should have minimum grading of B2, etc. in subject in 10th Class.
With this circular it was mentioned that those who complete the course shall be absorbed in the LIC as Assistant/Career Agents, as per details given in Annexure 2.
If we refer to Annexure 2 it is mentioned therein that employment opportunities will be provided for the students who come out successful in the 12th Standard in Life Insurance Vocational Course as per the details mentioned therein.
Minimum eligibility includes passing of +2 level under CBSE in Life Insurance stream.
As to the limitation on number of persons to be considered for selection it is mentioned that the restrictions impose under clause 6(vi) of LIC Recruitment (of Cl. III & Cl. IV staff) Instructions 1979 in respect of the number of candidate to be called for test shall not apply to those who have passed the +2 level of CBSE in insurance stream, and they will be allowed to compete irrespective of the number who have applied for the post.
The details regarding recruitment test are -  "All those who pass +2 level of CBSE with Grade C1 and C2 will appear for the pre-recruitment test alongwith other candidates.
However, those who have passed +2 level CBSE in Life Insurance stream with grades B2+ and above will be exempt from entry test.
Of course, for Typist/Stenographers the grade test shall be necessary in all cases.
Not more than 25% of the vacancies arrived at after providing reservations for SC/ST etc. in the Divisions where the schools having vocational course are situated shall be filled by the candidates who have passed +2 level of CBSE.
The reservations will commence from 1991/92 when the first batch will be eligible for selection and that the number will be based on vacancies arrived at from the subsequent financial year."
Details as to training/apprenticeship, etc. are not relevant for our purposes.
A similar circular dated 22 November 1991 was addressed by the Chief (Personnel), LIC, to all Zonal Managers as to the absorption of students as apprentices who had taken Life Insurance as Vocational Course.
It is mentioned that students belonging to general category who had secured Grade B2 and above in each of the three vocational subjects, viz., (1) Principles & Practice of Life Insurance, (2) Computer and Life Insurance Administration, and (3) Accountancy, were eligible for selection as apprentices.
As regards Accountancy the eligibility criteria was getting Grade C2 and above.
For other two subjects, grading remaining the same.
Again in circular dated 4 February 1992 the eligibility criteria for Accountancy paper was C2 and above or 50% marks and other two papers it was B2 and above or 50% marks.
It is stated that this modified eligibility criteria for selection for non-test category would be applicable for three academic years 1989-91, 1990-92 and 1991-93.
8.
When the result of the petitioner for Class 12 examination was announced by the CBSE, she was given a marks sheet wherein she secured in Accountancy and Computer & Life Insurance Administration, A2 and B1 grades respectively, but in Principles & Practice - Life Insurance, she secured C1 grade.
However, she appeared in the paper of Principles and Practice - Life Insurance again and improved her performance thereby securing Grade A1.
As noted above, respondents say this is not enough and that the petitioner should have secured Grade B2+ or above in Principles and Practice - life Insurance in the first attempt itself.
From various circulars which have been brought on record we are unable to find any such condition imposed anywhere.
When the scheme is linked with CBSE and rules of CBSE provide for improvement in performance, we are of the opinion that the respondent is bound by CBSE rules.
It cannot be said that petitioner has not passed her 12th Class Examination securing Grade below B2 in paper of Principles and Practice - Life Insurance.
If the respondent has been working under a belief that students should take all the grades in the first attempt, such a policy should have been clearly spelled out in the circulars and the respondent cannot take ad-hoc decision calling these as policy matters.
It is for CBSE how to conduct examination and what grade to be given to the students.
We are of the opinion that the petitioner has fulfilled all the criteria laid down by the respondent and she could not be denied her right to be admitted as an apprentice with the respondent as per policy and as shown in the advertisement issued by the Directorate of Education, Delhi.
The Bulletin of Information issued by the CBSE clearly says that Life Insurance is one of the courses which CBSE offers in collaboration with LIC.
This course is job-linked and guarantee placement as per rules/regulations and conditions laid down by the LIC and is imparted only in selected schools.
When CBSE says that petitioner has secured B2+ Grade in all the three principal papers.
9.
During the course of hearing we were told that all the students who passed 12th Class examination taking eligible grades have been selected as Apprentice Assistants by the respondent.
The object of LIC in floating the scheme is laudable, but the right which has accrued to a candidate under the scheme cannot be frustrated on mere technicalities.
Vocational schemes are job- oriented and the policy of the State is that educated youth may not remain unemployed.
Rather they should be provided employment by linking their educational degrees with jobs.
Accordingly, the petition is allowed.
A mandamus is issued to the respondent Life Insurance Corporation of India to interview the petitioner and after her medical examination select, her as an Apprentice Assistant.
Petition allowed.