Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - The short question for consideration in this writ petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India is whether the petitioner on having been acquitted with benefit of doubt on a criminal charge is entitled to full pay and allowances for the period he remained out of service.
2.
The facts leading to the filing of the writ petition are that petitioner Maha Singh while working as a Clerk was placed under suspension on having been arrested in a criminal case under Sections 307/506/148/149 I.P.C. vide order dated September 21, 1979 (copy Annexure P-1) to the writ petition) Subsequently, he was dismissed from service vide order dated 1021981 (copy Annexure P-2) as he was held guilty for the offences punishable under Sections 326, 325 read with 148 and 149 of the Indian Penal Code and was sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for various terms by the Additional Sessions Judge, Karnal, vide his judgment dated July 16, 1980.
On appeal, the petitioner was acquitted by this Court vide its judgment dated March 14, 1983 (copy Annexure P-3) by giving him the benefit of doubt.
As a result, the petitioner was reinstated vide order dated 23121983 (copy Annexure P-4).
Regarding the period of his suspension, it was ordered by respondent No. 2 vide its order dated 1101987 (copy Annexure P-6) that the petitioner should be paid nothing beyond subsistence allowance already drawn by him for the period he remained under suspension and the period of suspension be treated as duty only for the purpose of pension and leave.
Before taking the aforesaid decision, the petitioner was afforded an opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken vide order dated 11101984.
The petitioner submitted reply dated 2021987 to the said show cause notice.
The authority reached the conclusion that the suspension of the petitioner was not wholly unjustified and reiterated its earlier decision adverted to above.
3.
Aggrieved against the action of the respondents, the petitioner has filed this writ petition.
4.
The challenge to the impugned order dated 1101987 is that the petitioner having been acquitted in a criminal case, is entitled to full salary for the period he remained under suspension and there was no justification in passing the impugned order.
5.
On the other hand, the plea taken by the State is that the petitioner was not acquitted honorably by the High Court, but was given the benefit of doubt.
As such, he is not entitled to full salary.
In support of his contention, the state Counsel relied on the provisions contained in clause 3 of Rule 73 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules Vol.
I Part-I.
In reply to this argument of the State Counsel, the Counsel for the petitioner had argued that period of suspension of the petitioner should have been regularised in accordance with the provisions contained in Rule 75 which applies to reinstatement after suspension for criminal proceedings and that rule 73 did not apply in his case.
6.
I have considered the submissions of the counsel for the parties and perused the paper-book.
7.
On going through the provisions contained in Rules 73 and 75 of the Punjab Civil Service Rules, Vol.
I Part-I, I am of the view that there is distinction between the two.
Rule 73 is a general rule and it specifically deals with reinstatement after departmental enquiries, whereas Rule 75 applies to reinstatement after suspension for criminal proceedings.
In an identical matter, this Court in Jagmohan Lal v. State of Punjab and Others, AIR 1967 Punjab 422, held as under :-  "Whether a person is acquitted with benefit of doubt or for other reasons, the result is that his guilt is not proved.
Criminal courts are not concerned to find the innocence of an accused, but only to see whether the guilt of accused has been proved beyond reasonably doubt.
The intention of Rule 75 therefore is that when a criminal charge against a Government servant fails in a court of law, he should be deemed to be acquitted.
Thus a Government servant, acquitted, though with benefit of doubt, is entitled to full pay and allowances during suspension period under Rule 75 of the Punjab Civil Service Rules Vol.
I Part-I."
This view was subsequently followed by this Court in  In view of the aforesaid decisions, this writ petition is allowed and the impugned order dated 1101987 (Annexure P-6) is quashed.
The petitioner shall be entitled to full pay and allowances for the period he remained under suspension.
The arrears of pay and allowances and all consequential benefits be released to the petitioner within three months from the receipt of a copy of this order.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.