MR Agnihotri, J - Petitioner Dr. Ravinder Kumar Wadhwa appeared in the M.D.
(Medicine) Examination held in October 1989, by Maharishi Dayanand University, Rohtak, under roll No. 5607.
The examination consisted of theory as well as practicals/clinicals known as spotting.
Out of 400 marks for theory papers, the petitioner was awarded 220 marks, which comes to a little about 55 per cent, whereas in practicals/clinicals (spotting) he was awarded only 173 marks.
On that basis he was not declared successful.
Aggrieved by that, the petitioner has invoked the extraordinary jurisdiction of this Court by contending that-firstly, even with 173 marks out of 400 marks in practicals/clinicals (spotting) the petitioner should have been declared successful as another candidate Hans Raj, who secured 172 marks in spotting had already been declared successful; and secondly questions Nos. 9, 10 and 13 of spotting have not been correctly awarded as the marks awarded by the examiner to the petitioner for all the three questions are zero, whereas the award of these questions of other candidates for answers to these very questions is different.
On that basis, the petitioner contended that instead of zero, he was entitled to 10 marks each for the answers to these questions, thereby adding at least 30 marks for these questions, which would raise his marks from 173 to 203 in the practicals/clinicals (spotting).
This increase in the award would have changed the fate of this result and secured clear success to him in the M.D.
(Medicine).
This disparity in the award qua the petitioner was dus to some interpolation and tampering in the assessment and evaluation as, according to the petitioner, respondents Nos. 4 to 7 were inimically disposed towards the petitioner.
2.
In the written statement, allegations of any personal bias, discrimination and arbitrariness have been stoutly refuted by the respondents, yet the factual position could not be successfully denied.
3.
Supplementing the preliminary objections and other objections raised by the respondents Mr. Balram Gupta, learned counsel appearing for them, has vehemently contended that there being no provision for revaluation of the answer books the Court could not interfere in the award given by the internal examiners of the University and the result of the petitioner be left as it is.
4.
Mr. JN Kausal, learned Senior Advocate, appearing on behalf of the petitioner and assisted by Mr. Naubat Singh, Advocate has, on the other hand, placed firm reliance on the authoritative pronouncement of the Supreme Court in Shivajirao Nilangekar Patil v. Dr. Mahesh Madhav Gosavi, AIR 1987 SC 294, which fully covers the case of the petitioner.
In that case also, the Hon'ble Supreme Court upheld the direction issued by the High Court to the effect that the result already declared be revoked and that there should be fresh examination by the other examiners.
Exactly this is the precise relief claimed by the petitioner in the present case though the petitioners' first prayer is to declare him successful on the basis of 173 marks in spotting as one Hans Raj with 172 marks out of 400 marks in the same practicals/clinicals that is spotting, has already been declared successful.
5.
It was for the redressal of this grievance that the petitioner had made a representation to the Vice Chancellor on 30th October, 1990, followed by a reminder dated 22nd October, 1991 in which it was prayed that the answers to questions Nos. 9, 10 and 13 of 'spotting' be got re-evaluated by some examiners other than the team of earlier examiners, that is, respondents Nos. 4 to 7. even in the PGI Chandigarh, but somehow the request was declined on 27th November, 1991.
6.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I find that ends of justice would be adequately met if the MD University, Rohtak, is directed to have the answers to questions Nos. 9, 10 and 13 as attempted by the petitioner in the answer-book of 'spotting' re-evaluated by the Professor of Medicine in the Post-Graduate to Institute of Medical Education, Chandigarh  7.
Accordingly, I allow this petition and by issuing a writ of mandamus direct the MD University, Rohtak, to get the answers to questions Nos. 9, 10 and 13 of practicals/clinicals (spotting) as attempted by the petitioner in his answer-book re-evaluated by the Professor of Medicine in the Post-Graduate Institute of Medical Education, Chandigarh within a period of one month.
After the receipt of fresh award from the P.G.I., Chandigarh, final result of the petitioner shall be declared by the University within a month thereafter.
In the circumstances of the case, there shall be no order as to costs.
Records be sent back forthwith.