DM Dharmadhikari, J - The petitioner is in the Army in Signal Corps and challenges, in this petition under Article 226/227 of the Constitution, his premature retirement at the age of fifty years by the impugned order of discharge dated 18.4.77 (Annexure P-II).
According to the petitioner, in accordance with the Army Regulation 163(b)(iv) read with Army Orders issued thereunder he was entitled to continue in service upto the age of fifty five years.
2.
Few facts necessary for decision of this petition are that the petitioner's date of birth is 291937.
He was enrolled in the Army on 1st of June, 1959, He was promoted as Naib Subedar on 7th of October, 1972.
He was further promoted as Subedar on 16/2081979 and thereafter he was again promoted to the rank of Subedar Major on 1/691985 from which rank he was alleged to have been retired.
According to the petitioner, under Army Order 13/77 dated 161276 (filed by the petitioner as Annexure-PR-VI(B), while he was in the rank of Naib-Subedar he had given an option for continuance upto 26 years of pensionable service or fifty years of age.
This option was available to all pre-65 entrants in the Army.
As per the corrigendum issued to the said Army Order No. 13/77 a note was added providing for waiving of such option.
The aforesaid corrigendum relaxing the condition of such option is on record of the petition as Annexure-PR-VI(C) and Annexure-PR-VI(D).
3.
The petitioner's case thereafter is that the above option exercised by the petitioner as Naib Subedar, however, stood cancelled by the Army Headquarters letter No. A/16099/116/AG/PS 2(c) dated 12th August, 1986 (Annexure-PR-V).
The petitioner's case, therefore, is that as the option exercised by the petitioner has been cancelled by the aforesaid letter, the petitioner is entitled to be retired on normal completion of fifty five years of his age in accordance with the Army Regulation 163(b)(iv) from the rank of Subedar Major.
4.
The respondents representing Army Authorities have opposed the petition.
After filing of return by them, the petitioner filed a counter by way of a rejoinder.
The petitioner in his rejoinder pointed out that the case of another non-commissioned officer namely, Sub.
Maj. Kunjunni Nair, who was similarly situated has been decided by the authorities in his favour giving him benefit of continuance of service at the age of fifty five years as also a chance to him to take honorary commission.
The stand as disclosed from the reply of the respondents submitted on 26101990 to the application filed by the petitioner on 1681990 is to the following effect that the case of both the petitioner and Kunjunni Nair, who were pre-65 entrants and optees for revised terms under Army Order 13/77 is under reconsideration of the Army Authorities in view of the pendency of the present writ petition.
Reference in the above respect has been made by the respondents in their reply dated 26101990 to the correspondence on the subject contained in Annexure-T which is a letter dated 4690 and Annexure-U which is a letter dated 9890.
It will be useful for the purpose of deciding the controversy in this case to quote the contents of the letter dated 4690 (Annexure-T) :  "2.
After a careful study of the cases in respect of Sub.
Maj. (Clk GD) Kapileshwar Singh and Sub.
Maj. (Clk GD) Kunjunni Nair G, it is revealed that the JCOs are pre-65 entrants and while holding the rank of Nb Sub had opted for revised terms as per AG13/77 as amended.
Thus their terms of engagement in the rank of Nb Sub after exercising the option for revised terms of engagement was reduced by two years.
3.
The Government of India, Ministry of Defence letter No. A/16099/Policy/AG/PS2(c)/2085/S/D(AG) dated 16 Dec, 76 reproduced in AO13/77 as amended was issued with the intention to enhance the service limit to JCOs and not to reduce it.
To make this point clear, AG's Branch vide letter No. A/16099/Policy/AG/PS-2(c) dated 18 Apr./19 May, 79 and A/16099/116/AG/PS-2(c) dated 12 Aug, 86 rules that any option exercised to be governed by the revised ages of retirement issued vide above Government letter by a pre-65 entrant while holding the rank of NB Rs/Nb Sub (Clk) are to be treated as cancelled and the relevant service documents amended accordingly.
It is also clarified in that there would be no requirement of subjecting these categories to any screening to assess their suitability for retention in service.
4.
In view of the above, the case of Sub Maj (Clk GD) Kunjunni Nair G should be treated as non-optees for the revised terms of engagement and should be governed by old terms i.e. 32 years pensionable service or 5 years tenure or 55 years of age whichever is earlier applicable to his present rank as Sub.
Maj. (Clk GD).
Also, screening to assess suitability for retention upto enhanced service limit is not applicable in his case.
The case may be dealt accordingly."
5.
When the matter was considered at the Directorate General of Signals, view taken in the later and conveyed on 9890 (Annexure-U) reads as under :  3.
It is further submitted that option certificate rendered by individual is a contract between Govt. and the individual and is a legal document.
Hence, it is for consideration whether its cancellation without the consent of the individual would be appropriate or otherwise.
This office has taken plea in the case of JC 71095P Sub.
Maj (Clk GD) Kapileshwar Singh (retired) v. Govt of India which is pending in the MP High Court, Jabalpur.
The counter affidavit filed by this office taking this plea has been votted by Army HQ and legal adviser (Defence) vide Army HQ letter No79966/Court/KS/Sigs 4(b) dated 15 Dec, 89.
4.
In view of the above, it is submitted that the ruling contained in Army HQ letter under reference may please be re-examined at the earlier.
In the meantime this office may please be advised whether to withdraw the case of JC-71895P Sub.
Maj. (Clk GD) Kapileshwar Singh (Retd.)
from the High Court and the JCO is to be reinstated in service or otherwise.
5.
It is further submitted that JC-71895P Sub.
Maj. (Clk.GOI) Kapileshwar Singh has asked for a copy of Army HQ letter under reference.
It is for consideration whether he should be supplied with a copy of said letter or he may be informed that the case is still under reference/examination by Army HQ."
6.
The question that is now posed for decision before us by both the parties is whether the option once exercised can be allowed to be withdrawn or cancelled.
7.
The answer to this question, according to us, is simple.
The petitioner while in the rank of Naib Subedar had exercised that option under Army Order No. 13/77 as amended on 15th March, 1988.
This option was treated as cancelled vide letter dated 1281986 (Annexure-PR-V) and the petitioner never objected to the same.
On the contrary, the petitioner relies on it and states that the option given by him as pre-65 entrant in terms of AC 13/77 be not applied in his case.
We do not find any legal prohibition in permitting an employee to withdraw his option with his consent which happens to be unfavourable to him.
The query raised by the Army Authorities, therefore, that such an option amounts to a contract and cannot be allowed has no basis on facts.
8.
The petitioner then faintly argued for his claim for honorary commission on the basis of his continuance of his service.
We do not want to express any opinion of the same.
It is up to the Army Authorities to consider his case for honorary commission on the basis of criteria laid down and annexed as Annexure-V with the reply of the respondents dated 261090.
9.
In view of the discussion aforesaid we held that the petitioner was wrongly retired at the age of fifty years and the impugned order of his discharge dated 1841987 (Annexure-P-II) is hereby quashed.
The petitioner is entitled to continue in service in terms of Army Regulation 163(b)(iv) which reads as under :  163.
Retirement :- JCOs.
(a)....  (b) The JCOs enrolled prior to 25 Jan, 65 still serving on old terms will be retired on completion of following service or age limits :  (iv) Ris Maj/Sub Maj. 32 years pensionable service, 5 years tenure or 55 years of age, whichever is earliest."
The petitioner's retirement is governed by the aforesaid Army Regulation 163 quoted above and the respondents/authorities are directed to pass a fresh order of retirement of the petitioner on due date in terms of Regulation 163(b)(iv) and grant his all consequential monetary and terminal benefits.
The petitioner shall also get costs of this petition.
Counsel fee Rs1000/- if certified.
Petition allowed.