SS Sodhi, J - The order vacating ex parte stay of the termination of the services is what constitutes the challenge in this appeal.
2.
Relying upon the judgment of the Division Bench in Piara Singh v. State of Haryana, 1988(4) SLR 739, the appellant Balwinder Kaur filed a writ petition seeking regularisation of her services.
This claim being founded upon her appointment as Clerk on a purely temporary basis.
To begin with, she was given an appointment as such for 89 days.
In pursuance of this appointment she joined her duties on October 28, 1988.
Later, she was given two successive appointments of 89 days each until June 30, 1989 when she was ordered to be relieved to make way for regular appoint to be appointed.
It is then that she filed the writ petition.
3.
The termination of the services of the petitioner was stayed by an ex parte order passed by the motion Bench but after notice the respondents appeared and opposed it culminating in the vacation of the ex parte stay by the impugned order of the leaned single Judge of November 1, 1989.
It deserves mention at the very outset that on the admission of this appeal, their impugned order of the learned single Judge vacating the ex parte stay granted to the appellant was again stayed by an ex parte order which was later confirmed after notice to the respondents.
The appellant has, as a consequences, continued in service ever since.
4.
Keeping in view the law as laid down by the Supreme Court in State of Haryana v. Piara Singh, 1992(5) SPJ 1 : 1992(3) SCT 201, the appellant Balwindeer Kaur is clearly not entitled to claim regularisation of her services merely on her three appointments for 89 days each.
5.
Further, the fact that the appellant has continued in service by virtue of the interim order passed, first by the motion bench admitting her writ petition and later on the filing of this appeal, cannot advance her case in view of the Judgment of the Division Bench in Gurpal Singh v. State of Haryana, 1993(1) PLR 232, where it was observed " in proceedings under articles 226 of the Constitution pertaining to regualarisation of services of ad hoc employees on the completion of the specified period or conditions, the position to be seen is as on the date of the filing of the petition.
In other words, the petitioner cannot in such a case, be permitted to add on the period of his continuance in service by virtue of an interim order passed by the High Court and to thereby fulfil the requisite length of service to claim regularisation of his services."
6.
Seen in this light, no exception can, indeed, be taken to the impugned order of the learned single Judge setting aside the ex-parte order staying the termination of the services of the appellant.
7.
This appeal is consequently hereby dismissed.
In the circumstances, however, there will be no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.