RS Mongia, J - This judgment of mine will dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 13797 and 15530 of 1992.
2.
For facility of reference the facts of Miss Seema Sharma's case (Civil Writ Petition No. 13797 of 1992) are being adverted to.
The facts of both the cases are almost identical but wherever the facts differ, the same will be adverted to Miss Seema Sharma, while studying in MM Modi College, Patiala appeared in B.Sc.
Part I examination held by the Punjabi University Patiala in April, 1990.
She passed in all papers except in Chemistry and, therefore, her result was to re-appear in the subject of Chemistry.
She was allowed to join the next class, i.e. B.Sc.
Part II.
She appeared in reappear paper (Chemistry) in September, 1990, but failed to clear the same.
In April 1991 she again appeared in reappear paper of chemistry of B.Sc.
Part I and along with that she also appeared in B.Sc.
Part II.
Though she cleared B.Sc.
Part II examination as a whole, yet she could not clear re-appear paper of Chemistry of B.Sc.
Part I It may be observed here that she was allowed to join BSc Part-III Class after she had been declared successful in B.Sc.
Part-II.
In April, 1992 petitioner appeared in B.Sc.
Part III examination, but did not appear in B.Sc.
Part-I re-appear paper in Chemistry.
On 15.7.1992 the University sent provisional information regarding result of the petitioner of B.Sc.
Part III examination.
She was informed that her B.Sc.
Part III examination result was being held as she had not cleared the lower examination.
However, according to the provisional information the petitioner had passed in all the papers of B.Sc.
Part III.
The difference on facts as far as the other case i.e. that of Miss Seema Kaushal (Civil Writ Petition No. 15530 of 1992) is concerned she got reappear in one of the papers of B.Sc.
Part III.
3.
Petitioner was not allowed by the University to sit to clear her B.Sc.
Part I (Chemistry paper) in supplementary examination held in October 1992 which led the petitioner-Miss Seema Sharma to file writ Petition No. 13797 of 1992.
The Motion Bench while issuing notice of motion on October 16, 1992 directed the respondent-University to permit the petitioner provisionally to take her examination of B.Sc.
Part I (Chemistry) was to be subjected to the final decision in the writ petition.
(There are no such interim directions in case of Miss Seema Kaushal as she approached the court after the examination of B.Sc.
Part I was over).
4.
In para Nos. 13 and 14 of Miss Seema Sharma's writ petition it has been averred as under :-  " That while denying the petitioner IIIrd chance to re-appear in the Supplementary Examination the respondent-University has acted in a discriminatory manner and its action is wholly violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
It is respectfully submitted that one Miss Paramjit Kaur, a class fellow of the petitioner in MM Modi College, Patiala also got re-appear in one subject of B.Sc.
Part-I in the annual examination held in April, 1990.
Said Paramjit Kaur availed two chances of re-appear like the petitioner in September 1990 and in April, 1991.
However said Paramjit Kaur was given third chance to re-appear in the Supplement Examination and the said chance was given to her without any special circumstances.
Said Miss Paramjit Kaur qualified in the supplementary examination only in the third chance.
It is most relevant to state here that like the petitioner said Miss Paramjit Kaur also qualified the B.Sc.
Part II examination before qualified in the Supplementary Examination of BSc.
Part I The case of Miss Paramjit Kaur was identical with the petitioner."
"Para 14 : That even after permitting 3rd chance to Miss Paramjit Kaur stated above the respondent-University withheld her result of the Supplementary Examination.
Said Miss Paramjit Kaur approached this Hon'ble Court and her result was declared only after the notice of motion.
The petitioner, therefore, is entitled to be given the same treatment."
To this the reply of University is as under :-  " That in reply to para 13 of the Writ Petition it is submitted that as already stated the petitioner is not eligible to appear in September/October, 1992 examination.
She has already exhausted.
The admissible chances to qualify the paper of Chemistry B.Sc.
Part I However, it is not feasible to comment upon the candidature of Miss Paramjit Kaur an alleged class fellow of the petitioner in MM Modi College, Patiala in the absence of Roll Number and session in which the said Miss Paramjit Kaur appeared in the examination."
"That the filing of the writ petition by Miss Paramjit Kaur is a matter of record.
As already stated in the absence of the details about the said Miss Paramjit Kaur regarding the Roll Number and the Session, it is difficult for the answering respondents to give a proper reply.
The petitioner as already stated is not eligible for appearing in September/October, 1992 examination for clearing her Chemistry paper."
Before the writ petition was admitted the petitioner also filed re-joinder in which the details of writ petition filed by Miss Paramjit Kaur were given.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that they are being discriminated inasmuch as similarly situated person, i.e. Miss Paramjit Kaur was allowed third additional chance to clear her B.Sc.
Part I paper.
He pointed out that as far as Miss Seema Sharma is concerned she had already appeared in B.Sc.
Part I (Chemistry) subject in pursuance of the order of this Court.
It was also submitted that simply on the ground that petitioners had not passed the B.Sc.
Part I examination within two chances, it would be too harsh now at this stage to cancel the result of the petitioners of B.Sc.
Part-II and Part-III as Miss Seema Sharma has already cleared B.Sc.
Part-II and Part-III examination whereas Miss Seema Kaushal also cleared her B.Sc.
Part II and Part III examination, except for one paper.
6.
Taking into consideration the facts that a similarly situated person like the petitioner, Miss Paramjit Kaur was allowed by the University one additional chance to clear re-appear paper of B.Sc.
Part I and also the fact that Miss Seema Sharma has already appeared in B.Sc.
Part-I examination by virtue of interim order of this Court and further fact that the petitioners have cleared their B.Sc.
Part II as well as Part III examinations, (Miss Seema Kaushal has to re-appear in one paper of B.Sc.
Part I and Part-III), I am of the view that it will be too harsh to put the clock back at this stage.
Once the petitioners were allowed to appear in B.Sc.
Part II and Part III examinations it will really be too stringent a view if they are not allowed to clear their B.Sc.
Part-I examination by giving them an additional chance.
As observed earlier, under similar situation, one Miss Paramjit Kaur was given one additional chance.
7.
For the foregoing reasons, these writ petitions are allowed and the respondents are directed to give one additional chance to the petitioners to clear their B.Sc.
Part-I examination.
As noticed earlier the petitioner-Miss Seema Sharma has already appeared for B.Sc.
part-I (Chemistry) subject by virtue of interim orders of this Courts.
Let her result of that examination as also the result of B.Sc.
Part-II and Part-III be declared on regular basis.
8.
Miss Seema Kaushal be also given one additional chance in the forthcoming examination to appear in B.Sc.
Part-I (Chemistry) subject for which, it is stated, that she has already applied to appear.
If she clears her said paper, then her result of B.Sc.
Part-II and Part-III be also declared on regular basis.
It is stated by the counsel for petitioner that there is some clash of dates of examination of B.Sc.
Part-I (Chemistry) as well as B.Sc.
Part-III examination (Chemistry) in the forthcoming examination.
If that is so, the University authorities would see that the petitioner can appear in both the papers by making come special arrangements and if no special arrangement is possible then let the petitioner taken B.Sc.
part-I examination now in the forthcoming examination and be permitted to take B.Sc.
Part-III re-appear paper in the next examination.
9.
There will be no order as to costs.
Let a copy of this order attested by my Reader be given Dasti to the Petitioners counsel.
Order accordingly.