RS Mongia, J - This judgment will dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 9200 of 1992, 9818 of 1992, 12088 of 1992 and 13217 of 1992 as identical questions of law and facts are involved in the same.
2.
Some persons were being employed on seasonal basis as Health Assistant (Swasthaya Sahayak), Sanitary Supervisors by the State of Haryana under a scheme knows as National Malaria Education Programme sponsored by the Central Government.
Such employees were being employed for about four and half months every year.
They filed many writ petitions one of them being Civil Writ Petition No. 9631 of 1988 claiming that they should be employed throughout the year on regular basis.
The learned Single Judge of this Court disposed of the Writ Petition on 3.5.1990 and gave certain directions to the State Government to frame a scheme for appointing/absorbing such employees.
L.P.A. No. 1136 of 1990 was filed against that judgment.
While upholding of the judgment of the Single Judge LPA Bench observed that the appellant (State of Haryana) should prepare a scheme suitable to the State of Haryana and act accordingly.
In pursuance of the Judgment referred to above, the State of Haryana framed a scheme on 751991, a copy of which has been attached as Annexure P-9 to the present writ petition.
3.
The present writ petitioners were also being appointed on seasonal basis as Health Assistants (Swasthaya Sahayak)/Sanitary Supervisors.
They impugned the scheme prepared by the State of Haryana alleging that the same was not in conformity with the judgment of the learned Single Judge in Civil Writ Petition No. 9631 of 1988 decided on 951990 (which was upheld as stated above) by the LPA Bench on 241991.
4.
The learned counsel for the petitioners has failry stated that since the filing of the writ petition, the validity of the scheme has been upheld by this Court, and therefore, he would not be in a position to challenge validity of the scheme any more.
To keep record straight, it may be observed that validity of the scheme has been upheld by this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 14929 of 1991 decided on S. No. 6.
5.
Faced with the situation the learned counsel for the petitioners contended that the scheme as prepared is not being implemented in letter and spirit.
He drew my attention to Para (iii) of the scheme which is in the following terms :  "The workers who are presently employed in the District through Employment Exchange for 4-1/2 months for spray work be accommodated for whole year if the vacancy of regular Swasth Sahayak/Field worker falls vacant during the spray season.
In case the vacancy occurs in the off-season, this may be filled through the Employment Exchange out of the Swasth Sahayak on the basis of seniority-cum-suitability.
All rules already in force regarding recruitment are to be followed in this case also."
The learned counsel for the petitioners referred to the pleadings in Para 11 of the petition and the reply on behalf of the Government to these pleadings.
The same are reproduced as below :-  "That besides this a large number of vacancies of Sanitary Supervisor and Health Assistant and Field workers of Class-Ill and Class-IV employees respectively in the urban area scheme under Health Department at Faridabad are vacant for the whole year and the budget for these vacancies for the year 1991-92 under the National Malaria Eradication Programme Urban has been sanctioned and given to the respondent No. 1.
The petitioners can be permitted to continue in service as such against the above vacancies which are lying vacant.
Otherwise also the petitioners are entitled to continue for the whole year on the basis of their seniority in accordance with the direction of this Hon'ble Court.
Besides this the Sanitary Supervisors and Health Assistants can be accommodated against Class-III and Class-IV posts of Health Department, i.e., multipurpose Health Workers, guards in Hospitals, peons etc. and the vacancies of anti-Larwa Scheme available with the respondents as being done by the Delhi Municipal Corporation in accordance with the scheme."
"That in reply to para S No. 8 of the writ petition that the Sanitary Supervisors cannot be adjusted against the post of Multipurpose Health Workers (Class-III) due to their qualification background, which is only Matric, while Multipurpose Health Workers have training in S. No. 8 year from Family Welfare Training Centre, Rohtak/Industrial Training Institute, after Matric, there are only two posts, of Field Workers (Class-IV) vacant in district Mohindergarh under Urban Malaria Scheme, which is under 10% cut."
From the above pleadings, the learned counsel submitted that the State Government was admitting two posts of Field Workers (Class-III) were lying vacant in District Mohindergarh under Urban Malaria Scheme but those have not been filled from amongst the petitioners or similarly situated persons under para (iii) of the scheme reproduced above;  6.
The learned counsel for the respondents submitted that there was a general 10% cut imposed by the State Government of Haryana on the recruitment of various posts and it was under these instructions of General Act that these posts had not been filled in.
7.
The learned counsel for the petitioners also submitted that in view of the Judgment of the learned Single Bench in Civil Writ Petition No. 9631 of 1988 in pursuance of which, the scheme was prepared, the petitioners should be offered alternative post for which they may be qualified.
8.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that there is no merit in the submission of the learned counsel for the Petitioners.
No doubt in the Writ Petition, respondents have admitted that there were two posts of field workers lying vacant in Mohindergarh District but the explanation given for not filling in of the same is justified because of the general cut imposed by the State of Haryana.
However, the learned counsel for respondents prays that if and when cut is removed or any further posts fall vacant, the petitioners and similarly situated persons would necessarily be considered for absorption.
9.
As far as the contention of the learned counsel, that the petitioners should be offered alternative posts which the State Government may envisage to fill in, though those may not strictly fall under the scheme, yet I hope that the State Government would give due consideration to this fact that the persons like the petitioners have worked under the scheme on seasonal basis and are qualified for the posts which it envisages to fill in.
Such persons may be given some preferential treatment while filling in these posts.
10.
Subject to the observations made above, these writ petitions are dismissed with no orders as to costs.
Petition allowed.