Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioners in these two writ petitions viz CAT Nos. 6547 of 1987 and 2015 of 1992 have a common target in respondent No. 3 vide order dated July 9, 1987, respondent No. 3 was promoted as Junior Lecturer Plastic Surgery on ad hoc basis.
Vide order dated December 4, 1991, he was given notional promotions as Senior Lecturer, Plastic Surgery with effect from April 24/25, 1985- "the date from which his immediate junior Dr. Avtar Singh was promoted/joined as Senior Lecturer, Plastic Surgery --".
Respondent No. 3 was also declared senior to Dr. Avtar Singh and Dr. Vikram Parkash Gupta.
The order dated July 9, 1987 has been impugned in CWP No. 6647 of 1987 while the latter order passed on December 4, 1991 has been challenged in CWP No. 2015 of 1992.
The primary question in both these petitions relates to the liability of respondent No. 3 for promotion of the post of Senior Lecturer, Plastic Surgery.
Consequently, both the petitions are being disposed of by a common judgment.
2.
The facts as evident from CWP No. 2015 of 1992 may be briefly noticed.
The two petitioners passed the MBBS examination in the year 1975.
After they had passed the MS (General Surgery) examination, they qualified the MCh (Plastic Surgery) examination in the year 1984.
They were appointed to PCMS Class II on February 16, 1978 and April 10, 1980 respectively.
As against this, respondent No. 3 passed the MBBS examination three years prior to the petitioners in January, 1971.
He passed the MS (General Surgery) Examination in the year 1979 and the MCh (Plastic Surgery) examination in the year 1990.
In the seniority list/gradation list of members of PCMS Class II, the name of respondent No. 3 appears at Serial No. 965 while those of petitioner Nos. 1 and 2 appear at serial Nos. 1784 and 2565 respectively.
3.
The petitioners aver that a temporary/ad hoc post of Senior Lecturer in Plastic Surgery became available in the year 1981.
This post had to be filled up by direct recruitment.
However, it was decided to fill up this post temporarily by promotion.
Through a circular issued to the members of the PCMS Class II, applications were invited for this post.
Five persons including respondent No. 3 had applied.
The petitioners had not submitted their applications.
The then Director, Research and Medical Education, Punjab (Respondent No. 2) had recommended the case of Dr. Gurpartap Singh for appointment of the post.
However, Dr. Bhupinder Singh respondent No. 3 was appointed.
Later on, when the post was filled up on regular basis, respondent No. 3 was rejected while Dr. Gurpartap Singh was appointed.
Similarly, in the year 1984 a post of Senior Lecturer became available which had to be filled up by promotion.
Five persons including the petitioners and respondent No. 3 had applied.
The petitioners aver that respondent No. 3 was rejected "basically on the ground of his non-fulfilling the qualifications."
Dr. Avtar Singh petitioner No. 1 was promoted and appointed as Senior Lecturer (Plastic Surgery).
A copy of this order had been produced on record as Annexure P-4.
This appointment was approved by the Punjab Public Service Commission with effect from the date of his appointment viz April 24, 1985 vide order dated May 3, 1990.
A copy of the order has been produced as Annexure P-5.
A new post was created in the year 1985 which had to be filled by promotion.
Respondent No. 3, petitioner No. 1 and two other candidates had applied.
Again while petitioner No. 2 who had passed the MCh (Plastic Surgery) examination was appointed, respondent No. 3 though senior was rejected.
A copy of order dated February 26, 1986 appointing petitioner No. 2 on ad hoc basis has been produced as Annexure P-6.
This appointment was approved by the Punjab Public Service Commission vide order dated May 12, 1990.
4.
The petitioners further aver that when the case of Dr. Avtar Singh was forwarded to the Commissioner for regularisation, the Govt. vide letter dated June 27, 1986 had mentioned that MCh was a necessary qualifications for the post of Senior Lecturer in Plastic Surgery.
A copy of this letter has been produced as Annexure P-8.
In spite of this, respondent No. 3 submitted a representation to respondent No. 2 claiming that he fulfilled all the qualifications, and thus he should be appointed as Senior Lecturer in Plastic Surgery and should be given seniority with effect from the date persons junior to him were selected and appointed.
The Govt. accepted the representation and appointed respondent No. 3 as Senior Lecturer in Plastic Surgery "against the non-existence (t) vacancy of Assistant Professor (Plastic Surgery)".
A copy of the order passed on July 9, 1987 has been produced as Annexure P-9 to this petition (and as Annexure P-5 in CWP No. 6647 of 1987).
It is this order which has been challenged by Dr. Gurdev Singh Sidhu through the said petition.
While the representation of respondent No. 3 was pending, the petitioners filed "representations to Govt. representing that respondent No. 3 did not possess the qualifications for appointment to the post of Senior Lecturer and therefore he should not be appointed."
Copies of these representations have been produced as Annexure P-12 and P-13 with this petition.
Having got the orders of promotion, respondent No. 3 represented for ante-dated seniority.
The petitioners aver that this request was rejected vide order dated November 26, 1990, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-14.
Therefore, in spite of the fact that the representation of respondent No. 3 had been rejected, the petitioners received a show cause notice dated July 29, 1991 "asking them to show cause as to why respondent No. 3 be not given seniority over and above the petitioners".
A copy of this show cause notice has been appended as Annexure P-15 and the copy of the reply filed by one of the petitioners has been produced as Annexure P-16.
The Govt. then passed the order dated December 4, 1991 promoting respondent No. 3 with effect from April 24, 1985 and declared him to be senior to the two petitioners.
This decision was however subject to the result of C.W.P.
No. 6647 of 1987 filed by Dr. Gurdev Singh Sidhu.
A copy of this order has been produced as Annexure P-17.
The petitioners have challenged this order on various grounds which shall be presently noticed.
5.
The State of Punjab respondent No. 1 and Dr. Bhupinder Singh respondent No. 3 have filed separate written statements.
In the written statements filed on behalf of the State of Punjab, it has been inter alia averred that the Punjab Medical Education State Service (Class II) Rules, 1979 (hereinafter to be referred to as Class II Rules) do not lay down MCh (Plastic Surgery) as an essential qualification.
It has been further averred that vide Memo.
dated July 20, 1970, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure R-1 with the written statement in CWP No. 6647 of 1987, the Govt. had laid down the essential qualifications and teaching experience for the post of Senior Lecturers in Plastic Surgery as MS Surgery with three years teaching experience as Registrar Plastic Surgery.
MCh qualification has been prescribed for promotion to the post of Professor and Assistant Professor Plastic Surgery vide Punjab Govt. notification dated August 20, 1985 by which the Punjab Medical Education State Service (Class I) Rules, 1978 were amended.
The qualifications laid down by Medical Council of India are not mandatory and cannot overrule the existing provisions of rules governing the service.
The respondent avers that Dr. Bhupinder Singh possesses the basic requisite qualification of MS (General Surgery) and 3 years teaching experience in a particular speciality as prescribed in Appendix `C' to Rule 9 of the aforesaid Rules for the post of Senior Lecturer Plastic Surgery.
It has been further averred that respondent No. 3 has since done MCh in Plastic Surgery.
It has been further pointed out that respondent No. 3 had been promoted to the post of Senior Lecturer for a period of 6 months or till a suitable candidate was recommended by the Punjab Public Service Commission against the direct quota post, whichever is earlier vide Punjab Govt. No. dated 391981.
The selection was in accordance with the Punjab Medical Education State Service (Class-II) Rules, 1979 and instructions issued by the Punjab Govt. "On the selection of Dr. Gurpartap Singh for direct recruitment, respondent No. 3 was reverted vide order dated March 3, 1983.
The respondent has admitted that initially the petitioners were appointed as Senior Lecturers prior to respondent No. 3 as they possessed the qualification of MCh (Plastic Surgery) but later after considering the representation of respondent No. 3, tentative view was taken to the determination of inter se seniority of these doctors vide Annexure P-15 that a senior candidate fulfilling requisite qualification/teaching experience as prescribed under rules cannot be ignored on the ground that the junior is better qualified.
And as such it was viewed that Dr. Avtar Singh was wrongly promoted as Senior Lecturer Plastic Surgery over and above respondent No. 3.
After considering the representations of petitioners the said tentative view taken by the Government vide Annexure P-15 was finally decided by the competent authority vide order dated 10121991 appended to writ petition at Annexure P-17".
It has also been pointed out that one post of Assistant Professor (Plastic Surgery) at Amritsar was lying vacant against which respondent No. 3 has been adjusted temporarily.
The respondent avers that the notification of MCh having not been provided for in the rules, the existing provision regarding qualification of Master of Surgery for the post of Senior Lecturer entitled respondent No. 3 who was sufficiently senior to the petitioners to be appointed to the post of Senior Lecturer.
It is maintained that the action is legally valid and the various grounds raised in the petition have been controverted.
6.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondent No. 3, it has been averred that prior to the promulgation of Class II Rules in 1979 the qualifications for the posts of Senior Lecturer had been prescribed by the Govt. vide its letter dated July 20, 1970.
The respondent maintains that the qualifications mentioned in the Regulations framed by Medical Council of India for filling up various posts are recommendatory in nature and that the Punjab Govt. is still considering the inclusion of MCh as an essential qualification in the Rules.
It is averred that MS is a post graduate degree and MCh is a post-doctoral degree (after acquiring MS), as is evident from the PGI Brochure.
Further, details have been given to show that post graduate course is a three years' course after the completion of internship, or two-years' course after a candidate has done one years housemanship after finishing the internship.
Post-Doctoral course of MCh takes a total of 5 years after the internship.
In most of the centres it is two years's course after a post graduate degree, The respondent has referred to a number of appointments to the posts of Senior Lecturers and even on higher posts made in various super-specialities out of the persons possessing the qualifications of MS or MD in parent speciality.
A reference has been made to nine appointments to different posts in Class I/II services viz. to the posts of Professors, Assistant Professors and Senior Lecturers from the year 1981 to 1988 showing that those possessing the qualifications of MS Surgery or MD Medicine were considered eligible for appointment as Professor, Assistant Professor and Senior Lecturer.
It has been further pointed out that vide letter dated September 30, 1987, the Govt. had informed the Punjab Public Service Commission that proposal for the provision of M Ch.
qualification in Punjab Medical Education State Service Rules of 1979 is still under the consideration of Government.
It has also been highlighted that MCh had been prescribed as an essential qualification vide notification dated September 23, 1985 by which the provision contained in Punjab Medical Education Service (Class-I) Rules of 1978 was amended and the qualification of MCh was introduced for appointment to the posts of Assistant Professors and Professors etc. only.
The fact that the Class-II rules have not been amended shows that the Govt. did not wish to insist on this qualification for appointment to the posts in Class-II viz. Senior Lecturers or Lecturers.
The respondent also points out that Plastic Surgery is being taught in the MS Surgery course and this fact has been specifically certified by the Head of the Department of Plastic Surgery.
The respondent avers that there are about 5000 members of the PCMS Class-II and not even single doctor possesses the qualification of MS in Plastic Surgery, Urology, Paediatric Surgery or any other surgical super-speciality or MD in any super-speciality of Medicines.
In case the interpretation as is being pleaded by the petitioner is conceded, then "not a single candidate could have been appointed by promotion from PCMS General cadre as Senior Lecturer in any of the super-specialities like Urology, Paediatric Surgery, Cardio-Thoracic Surgery, Plastic Surgery, Cardiology, Nephrology and Neurology."
The respondent also points out that he was selected and appointed as Senior Lecturer vide order dated September 1, 1981 in preference to various other candidates including those who possessed the qualification of MCh The representations made by such candidates were later on rejected by the Govt. after consideration.
The initial appointment was extended twice.
Further he was interviewed by the Commission for direct recruitment to the post of Senior Lecturer as he was considered eligible.
It has also been pointed out that his supersession in 1985 by the appointment of petitioner No. 1 was objected to by the Punjab Public Service Commission.
Reference to the various communications exchanged between the Govt. and the Commission has been made to point out that the respondent could not have been considered ineligible and that it is a pure case of discrimination.
The respondent states that he has been continuously agitating and even the Commission had objected to his supersession vide its letters, at Annexures  R-10 and R-11.
After thorough consideration, the Govt. has undone the injustice.
7.
The averments made by respondent No. 3 have been controverted by the petitioners by filing a replication.
8.
I have heard Mr. PS Patwalia for the petitioners, Mr. SS Shergill for the State and M/s HS Mattewal (Senior Advocate) and lqbal Singh for respondent No. 3.
Mr. Patwalia has vehemently contended that MCh is an essential qualification for appointment to the post of Senior Lecturer (Plastic Surgery) and that respondent No. 3 is not eligible for appointment as a Senior Lecturer because he does not possess this qualification.
Learned counsel further contends that the petitioner having been promoted earlier than respondent No. 3 and his representation having been rejected by Govt. vide order dated November 26, 1990 (Annexure P/14), there was no ground for review of that order.
It is also contended that respondent No. 3 had not challenged the promotion of the petitioners, the action of the Govt. in passing the impugned order in spite of the fact that respondent No. 3 had raised certain objections wars wholly illegal.
In CWP 6647 of 1987 the primary claim made is that the petitioner was not considered even though he was eligible for appointment as Senior Lecturer.
On behalf of the respondent it has been pointed out that the rules do not prescribe the qualification.
of MCh for appointment to the post of Senior Lecturer.
The Govt. had not issued even an executive order in that behalf, The appointment to the post of Senior Lecturer had to be made on the basis of semority-cum-merit.
Respondent No. 3 is far senior to the petitioner and the action in ignoring him for promotion was wholly arbitrary and in this situation, the State Govt. has acted fairly in undoing the injustice and restoring the status quo ante.
9.
Before proceeding to consider the respective submissions made by the counsel for the parties, it is apt to notice that the provisions in the statutory rules.
The posts of Senior Lecturers and Lecturers are borne on the Class-II service.
The recruitment to this service is governed by the rules called the Punjab Medical Education State Service (Class II) Rules, 1979 (hereinafter referred to as the Class-II Rules).
Rule 2(c) of these rules defines a Department to mean the speciality as listed in Appendix `A' to these rules".
Rule 4 inter alia provides that the "Service shall comprise the posts shown in Appendix `B'".
Rule 9 provides that "no person shall be recruited to the Service by direct appointment or by promotion unless he possesses the qualifications and teaching experience specified in Appendix `C'."
it is further provided that "a member of the service recruited by direct appointment shall not be retained in service unless he acquires knowledge of Punjabi Language of matriculation standard within a period of six months from the date of his appointment to the Service."
Rule 10 inter alia provides that "in the case of Senior Lecturers Seventy-five per cent of the posts shall be filled in by promotion from amongst the members of the Punjab Civil Medical (Class II) Service possessing the qualification and teaching experience as shown in Appendix `C' and "Twenty-five per cent of the posts by direct appointment."
It is further provided that in case no suitable person is available for promotion to any post in the Service, the same shall be filled up by direct appointment."
The rule also provides that "all appointments to the Service by promotion shall be made by selection on the basis of seniority-cum-merit and seniority alone shall not give any right of appointment."
Rule 22 authorises the Govt. to "relax any of the provisions of these rules except the educational qualifications and experience with respect to any class or category of persons."
In Appendix `A' various departments are enlisted.
Plastic Surgery is mentioned at serial No. 16.
In Appendix `B' the post of Senior Lecturer in the Department of Plastic Surgery is mentioned.
In Appendix `C' the qualifications relating to the posts of Senior Lecturers were prescribed as under :-  "1.
Senior Lecturers : (i) Basic University Medical Qualifications included in the First or Second Schedule or Part II of the Third Schedule to the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956, with good academic career; or  (ii) Post-Graduate qualification in the particular speciality viz. MS, FRCS, MD, MRCP, DPH, D.T.D., and  (iii) Must possess at least 3 years teaching experience in the particular speciality as Lecturer, Registrar or Research Assistant in a teaching institution.
Note.
- Experience upto the extent of one year `in obstetrics and Gynaecology, ENT and Ophthalmology, and in the basic subjects of Anatomy, Physiology, Pharmacology, Pathology and Microbiology would be countable for the post of Senior Lecturer in the Surgery and its specialities.
Similarly benefit of experience upto the extent of one year in the basic subjects of Pathology, Microbiology, Anatomy, Pharmacology and Physiology would be countable for posts in the speciality of General Medicine.
Experience in Anaesthesia and Radiology would be countable for surgery and its specialities and General Medicine.
However experience in the allied subjects as Registrar or Demonstrator would be given preference over experience in the same subject as Assistant Registrar or Assistant Demonstrator and the experience in the latter would be counted as half of teaching experience in the former.
Teaching experience as Assistant Registrar or Assistant Demonstrator in the main speciality would be countable as full.
Credit upto the extent of one year would also be given for rural service.
However, experience of the allied subjects and rural service put together, should not exceed one year as two years experience in the main speciality is essential."
The above entry holds the key to the controversy in the present case.
A perusal of this entry shows that for appointment to the post of Senior Lecturer a person must possess a basic medical qualification like MBBS included in the schedule to the Indian Medical Council Act.
etc. with good academic career or a Post Graduate qualification in the particular speciality and at least 3 years' teaching experience as Lecturer, Registrar or Research Assistant in a teaching institution.
The use of expression `or' between clause (i) and (ii) per se shows that the Rule making authority has provided alternative qualifications.
The rule if literally construed does not insist upon a post graduate qualification at all.
It is only provided as an alternative.
Consequently, prima facie the contention on behalf of the petitioners that respondent No. 3 is ineligible as he did not possess a post graduate qualification in Plastic Surgery is untenable.
This is all the more so as the rule making authority has used the expression `or' between clauses (i) and (ii) and has used the suffix `and' after clause (ii).
The rule making authority knows the difference between the two expressions viz `Or'& `and'.
The fact that both have been mentioned in the same provision shows that the Rule making authority did not wish `or' to mean `and'.
It knows the difference.
It appears to have laid down that a person should possess one or the other qualification besides experience.
10.
Thus, the rule if literally construed, the requirement of a post graduate qualification is not mandatory.
It is only an alternative.
It is no body's case that respondent No. 3 did not have a basic university medical qualification with good academic career as laid down under clause (i).
He also had the prescribed experience.
He was thus fully eligible.
11.
However, keeping in view the fact that recruitment has to be made to a post on the medical faculty where the selected candidate has to teach the students for the award of even post graduate qualifications, it appears that the person concerned must possess more than mere elementary knowledge of the subject.
Notwithstanding the use of the expression `or' it may be assumed that the candidate must have a basic University Medical qualification with good academic career and a "Post graduate qualification in the particular speciality viz. MS, FRCS, MD, MRCP, DPH, D.T.D."
Is the qualification of MSF.
R.C.S., etc. merely illustrative of the post graduate medical qualification that candidate must possess or has the rule making authority specified the qualifications ?
What is the meaning of `Viz' ?
12.
In Corpus Juries Secundum `viz' has been shown as equal to Videlicet.
It has been given the following meaning :-  "Videlicet.
The word "Videlicet" is derived from the Latine "videre," to see, and "licet", it is permitted, and means literally "it is easy to see," or "one may or can see".
It is a kind of interpreter, and is the technical name given to the phrases "to wit," and that is to say", and to the word "namely" but the word "whether" is not considered to be videlicet.
The natural and probable use of a videlicet is to particular that which before is general to particularize that which is merely general in the preceding statement, to point out, particularize, or render more specific that which has been previously stated in general language only, to particularize or explain what goes before it.
It is also the office of a videlicet to distribute that which is in gross, and also to explain that which is doubtful or obscure.
Its common office is to state time, place, or manner which are of the essence of the matter in issue, but it may be, and frequently is, used as particularizing the more general antecedent matter.
Although it has been said that a videlicet must neither be contrary to the premises nor increase or diminish the precedent matter, and that when it is repugnant to or inconsistent with the preceding matter it is inoperative and void, it has also been said that it is a well-known rule of legal construction that the videlicet is used for the purpose of restraining the generality of the preceding term, or of qualifying it, and even of contradicting it."
From the above it is clear that `viz' means to particularize, rendering more specific something which has been stated in general language to particularize what precedes it.
It is used for the purpose of restraining the generality of the preceding term for qualifying it.
That being so, it appears that a person who possesses any of the qualifications mentioned in clause (ii) shall be deemed to possess a "post-graduate qualification in the particular speciality."
By the use of `viz', the qualifications have been particularised.
Nothing can be added thereto.
These are restricted.
Whatever could have been doubtful or obscure has been specified and restricted.
A general expression like post graduate qualification in a particular speciality has been restricted and particularised.
In other words, the rule cannot be read to mean any qualifications other than those which have been particularly specified.
One cannot add to them.
It is thus clear that by the word "viz" the rule-making authority has restricted the qualifications.
It has not mentioned these qualifications by way of illustration but these are the only qualifications which can be mandatorily insisted upon.
MCh is not one of these qualifications.
The rule does not require that a candidate must possess the qualification of MCh in Plastic Surgery before becoming eligible for appointment to the post of Senior Lecturer in Plastic Surgery.
13.
Even the attendant circumstances support this conclusion.
Prior to promulgation of the 1977 Rules, the Govt. had issued a letter on July 20, 1970 in which it was inter alia observed that "the Governor of Punjab in consultation with the Punjab Public Service Commission, Patiala, is pleased to lay down the following essential qualification and teaching experience for appointment as Senior Lecturer Plastic Surgery :  (i) Basic University Medical qualification included in the first or the second schedule or part II of the Third schedule to the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 with good academic career.
(ii) Post graduate qualifications Surgery viz. MS Surgery.
(iii) Must be registered under the State/Central Medical Registration Act, and  (iv) Must possess at least 3 years teaching experience as Registrar, Plastic Surgery."
A perusal of the above shows that a person possessing the qualification of MS Surgery was considered eligible for appointment to the post of Senior Lecturer in Plastic Surgery.
Notwithstanding the recommendations of the Medical Council of India which were as contended on behalf of the respondents, only recommendatory and not mandatory, the Govt. had not included MCh as one of the essential qualifications in the executive order or the statutory Rules.
Still further, the Govt. has been appointing persons possessing the qualification of MS. (Surgery) to various posts in Class I Service A list of these persons has been given in paragraph 4 of the written statement filed by respondent No. 3.
A perusal thereof shows that Dr. SN Mittal was appointed as Professor in the Department of Urology which is one of the specialities as mentioned in Appendix `A' to the Class-I Rules in the year 1985.
He possessed the qualification of MS (Surgery) only.
Similarly, Dr. RK Jindal was appointed in the Class I Service as an Assistant Professor in the Department of Urology even though he did not possess the degree of MCh (Urology).
Similar is the position with regard to a number of other persons.
In such a situation, it is clear that even the Govt. understood the Rules to mean that a person possessing the qualification of MS was eligible for appointment to one or the other specialities mentioned in Appendix `A' to the Rules.
14.
Was respondent No. 3 ineligible because he did not possess the qualification of MCh (Plastic Surgery) ?
On a perusal of the rules and the other data it appears clear to me that he was not ineligible.
Since MCh was not one of the qualifications prescribed under the Rules, he could not have been ignored for promotion to the post of Senior Lecturer merely because he did not possess the said qualification.
15.
Was he required to possess the qualification of MS Plastic Surgery ?
Mr. PS Patwalia vehemently contended that it was incumbent upon the respondent to possess a qualification of MS Plastic Surgery.
By referring to the schedules to the Indian Medical Council Act 1956, as amended upto November 1991, learned counsel pointed out that the degree was being specifically awarded by the University of Bombay, Lucknow and Patna.
Indeed, it is so.
However, it is not clear as to when this course was introduced by the respective Universities.
Furthermore, a perusal of the various instances quoted by respondent No. 3 clearly shows that various persons possessing the qualification of MS (Surgery) or MD (Medicine) were considered eligible for appointment to the posts in the specialities of Urology, Paediatric Surgery, Cardiology and Nephrology.
It was not insisted upon that to be eligible for appointment in the speciality of Urology, a person must have a degree of MS (Urology).
A degree of MS (Surgery) was considered sufficient.
No reason for carving out of an exception in the case of the speciality of Plastic Surgery has been made out.
If the qualification of MS (Surgery was adequate in case of Urology and Paediatric Surgery it cannot be considered insufficient in case of Plastic Surgery.
16.
The Govt. cannot add to the qualifications without amending the Rules.
It cannot add to the qualifications prescribed in the Rules even by an executive order.
The general requirement of a post graduate qualification in the speciality has been restricted to MS, MD or FRCS etc.
Nothing more can be insisted upon till the rules are amended.
If a person possessing the qualifications of MS (Surgery) is eligible for appointment as Senior Lecturer or Assistant Professor or even Professor in the speciality of Urology, it would be unfair to say that another person with the same qualification would be ineligible for appointment to the post of Senior Lecturer in Plastic Surgery.
The requirement of 3 years teaching experience as Registrar in a particular department having been laid down, the rule making authority has made its intentions manifest.
Such a person has been considered as being eligible.
Nothing more can be insisted upon.
17.
In view of the above, I find that respondent No. 3 was eligible for appointment to the post of Senior Lecturer (Plastic Surgery).
18.
A perusal of rule 10 mentioned above shows that the claim for promotion from PCMS-II to the post of Senior Lecturer has to be considered on the basis of "seniority-cum-merit."
Admittedly, the names of the petitioners appear at serial Nos. 1784 and 2565 respectively while that of the respondent No. 3 appears at serial No. 965.
He was thus far senior to them.
Nothing has been pointed out from the record to indicate that he was otherwise lacking in merit.
In fact, in the year 1981, he was actually appointed as Senior Lecturer.
He held this post from September 3, 1981 to March 3, 1983.
If he was eligible and suitable in the year 1981 he could not have been considered to be ineligible on the ground that he did not possess the Degree of MCh in the year 1985 when petitioner No. 1 was promoted and thereafter when petitioner No. 2 was promoted.
The action of the Govt. in doing so was clearly contrary to the rules.
If this wrong has been undone, only the rules have been complied with.
The mistake has been rectified.
The action was not in violation of the rules but in accordance therewith.
He was eligible.
He was wrongly considered to be ineligible.
Neither the lapse of time nor the promotion of the petitioners earlier than respondent No. 3 could debar the Govt. from passing the impugned order.
The executive has a right to do justice between the parties.
This is precisely what appears to have been done in the present case.
19.
From the above, it is clear that respondent No. 3 was eligible for promotion as Senior Lecturer at the time when the petitioners were promoted.
He was illegally ignored.
Consequently, the action of the Govt. in promoting him with effect from a date when petitioner No. 1 was promoted and in restoring the seniority of the said respondent above them is neither contrary to the rules nor otherwise illegal.
Mr. Patwalia however points out that the action is contrary to the rule laid down by the apex Court in State of Bihar & Others v. Sri Akhouri Sachindra Nath and others, JT 1991 (2) SC 279.
He relies on the following observations to contend that the action of the respondents is illegal.
"In the instant case, the promotee respondent Nos. 6 to 23 were not born on the cadre of Assistant Engineer in the Bihar Engineering Service, Class II at the time when the respondent Nos. 1 to 5 were directly recruited to the post of Assistant Engineer and as such they cannot be given seniority in the service of Assistant Engineers over the respondent Nos. 1 to 5.
It is well settled that no person can be promoted with retrospective effect from a date when he was not born in the cadre so as to adversely effect others.
It is well settled by several decisions of this Court that amongst members of the same grade seniority is reckoned from the date of their initial entry into the service.
In other words, seniority inter se amongst the Assistant Engineers in Bihar Engineering Service Class II will be considered from the date of the length of the service rendered as Assistant Engineers.
This being their position in law the respondent Nos. 6 to 23 cannot be made senior to the respondent Nos. 1 to 5 by the impugned Govt. orders as they entered into the said service by promotion after the respondent Nos. 1 to 5 were directly recruited in the quota of direct recruits.
The judgment of the High Court quashing the impugned Government orders made in annexures 8, 9 and 19 is unexceptionable."
This was a case of dispute between the direct recruits and the promotees.
The respondents were appointed as Assistant Engineers by promotion retrospectively so as to affect the rights of persons who had been appointed by direct recruitment and were already borne on the cadre.
Such is not the situation here.
In the present case, respondent No. 3 was admittedly senior to the petitioners in PCMS-II.
As already noticed, he was placed at serial No. 965 while petitioner No. 1 was more than 800 places below him and petitioner No. 2 was still for more junior to him.
In such a situation, I venture to think that the rule laid down by their Lordships of the Supreme Court is not attracted.
In a case where the claim of a senior is wrongly ignored for promotion, the mistake has to be perpetuated.
It can be rectified by the competent authority.
If the respondent had been promoted at the relevant time, the petitioners could have had no grievance.
The mere fact that he was promoted subsequently with retrospective effect cannot invalidate his promotion.
This view is fully supported by the law enunciated in a Full Bench judgment of this Court in BK Bhalla v. The State of Punjab & others, 1983 (1) SLR 636.
20.
Nor do I find any merit in the contention that the representation submitted by respondent No. 3 having been rejected vide order dated November 26, 1990, the Govt. could not have reviewed the case.
In Sunder Lal and others v. The State of Punjab and others, 1970 SLR 59, it was observed as under :-  "If owing to some bona fide mistake, the Government has taken a decision regarding the confirmation of an officer it can certainly revise its decision at a subsequent stage when the mistake comes to its notice.
The mistake can be corrected, it cannot be said that it should be allowed to perpetuate even when the same is discovered.
The consequent reduction of the officer could not amount to reduction in rank and attract the applicability of Article 311 of the Constitution.
Such a reduction is the necessary result of any routine administrative decision.
It is only when an officer brings his case within the purview of Article 311 of the Constitution that he can attach the legality of any order based by the Government, which might adversely affect his career in Government service.
Such a case does not come within the four corners of Article 311 of the Constitution.
In the instant case, the Government after having misinterpreted the Rules, had given war service concessions to the petitioners.
Subsequently, they realised their mistake and withdrew those benefits.
With the result that the seniority of the petitioners was affected.
The Government could correct the error and such a decision would not come within the ambit of Article 311 of the Constitution."
In the present case also, the mistake which had occurred has been corrected by the Government.
I find no merit in the contention and reject it.
21.
It was then contended that the impugned order does not assign any reason.
A perusal of the sequence of events shows that on receipt of a representation from respondent No. 3, a show cause notice was given to the petitioners.
In the show cause notice it was clearly mentioned that "Dr. Bhupinder Singh fulfilled the prescribed experience/qualifications when Dr. Avtar Singh and subsequently Dr. Vikram Parkash Gupta were promoted in 1985 and 1986 respectively as Senior Lecturer Plastic Surgery ignoring him on the ground that they were better qualified since they had done M Ch.
But this is not correct, for filling up promotion quota posts.
A senior candidate fulfilling requisite qualification/experience cannot be ignored on the ground that the Junior is better qualified."
This was the precise reason for the review of the earlier order.
This reason has not been shown to be either contrary to the rules or otherwise untenable.
As such, the reasons are apparent on the record.
Accordingly, there is no merit in the contention.
Even otherwise, it is apparent that the reply submitted by the petitioners was duly considered before the authority decided the matter finally.
22.
No other point was urged.
Consequently, I find no merit in this petition.
It is dismissed.
23.
CWP No. 6647 of 1987.
In this writ petition filed by Dr. Gurdev Singh Sidhu the only point urged by Mr. Patwalia was that the claim of the petitioner was not considered when respondent No. 3 was promoted in the year 1987.
Admittedly, the respondent was senior to Dr. Gurdev Singh Sidhu.
Appointment to post of Senior Lecturer has to be made on the principle of seniority-cum-merit.
It is only when a senior person is found to be lacking in merit or a junior is found to be a meritorious that he should be appointed in preference to a person that a grievance of this kind can be made.
Mr. Patwalia could not point out anything to show that the respondent was lacking in merit or that the petitioner was a person of outstanding merit.
In such a situation no injustice appears to have occurred and therefore no relief can be granted to the petitioner.
Consequently, both the petitions are wholly lacking in merit and are dismissed.
In the circumstances of the cases, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.