Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - In this writ petition, the four petitioners have prayed for "declaring/quashing the action of the respondents, if any, cancelling selections/appointments and terminating services of the petitioners .....".
It has been further prayed that the respondents be directed to "place on record the impugned order of termination/discharge of the petitioners, if any".
2.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been pointed out that "all the four petitioners and five other Rect.
constables were found absent from Police Lines on 27-5-92 at 2-00 PM.
On this they were marked absent vide DDR No. 19 of Roznamcha dated 27-5-92.
These petitioners returned back on 27-5-92 at 5-00 PM.
An entry to this effect was made in DDR No. 32 of Roznamcha dated 27-5-92.
The petitioners put up their signatures in the Roznamcha in token of their arrival ...... After that these petitioners and four other Rect.
Constables were found absent from Police Lines on 30-5-92 at 12-30 A.M. and on this they were marked absent vide DDR No. 50 of Roznamcha dated 30-5-92.
The petitioner Nos. 3 and 4 and two other Rect.
Constables returned back on 30-5-92 at 515 AM These four Constables refused to give in writing about their absence and misbehaved with the staff.
An entry to this effect was made in DDR No. 53 of Roznamcha dated 30-5-92.
The petitioner Nos. 1 and 2 and two other constables returned back on 30-5-92 at 5-40 A.M.
These officials also refused to give in writing about their absence and misbehaved with the staff.
An entry to this effect was made in entry No.55 of Roznamcha dated 30-5-92."
Various other instances regarding some other officials, have also been given.
On this premises, it has been averred that "the petitioners are not likely to become a good police officer."
However, it has been categorically stated that their services are not being terminated and "that no action against the petitioners has been taken by the answering-respondents."
3.
Mr. PL Singla, learned counsel for the petitioners contends that no details of any misconduct having been given, the plea raised on behalf of the respondents cannot be sustained.
4.
Having heard learned counsel for the parties, I find that this petition is wholly premature.
As yet no order has been passed which may entitle the petitioners to move this Court.
Presumably, apprehending that the respondents might take some action against the petitioners, they have moved this Court.
The petition at this stage is wholly premature and is dismissed as such.
If any order is passed, the petitioners would be at liberty to approach this Court through an appropriate petition.
This petition is dismissed.
No costs.