RS Mongia, J (Oral) - Petitioner had obtained a Degree of MA in Dance from Prayag Sangeet Samiti, Allahabad in the year 1970.
She also obtained Degree of MA in Music from Panjab University in the year 1979.
Still later, she obtained a Degree of MA in Music from Panjab University in the year 1979.
Still later, she obtained a Degree of MA in Dance from Punjab University in the year 1982, the result of which was declared on 14101982.
2.
Petitioner was appointed as a Lecturer in the subject of Dance at Government College for Women, Patiala on 21.12.1978 purely on ad hoc basis.
She continued to hold this post with national breaks till 26.3.1980 when she was selected through the Punjab Public Service Commission as a Lecturer in Music on regular basis.
3.
It has further been averred that even after her appointment as a Lecturer in Music, she was asked to continue teaching both subjects viz. Music and Dance.
One of the Posts of Lecturers in Commerce, which was sanctioned for Govt. College, Ropar vide Govt. memo dated 981982 was shifted to Govt. College for Women, Patiala temporarily and converted into a post of Lecturer in Dance.
Petitioner was adjusted against that post vide order dated 3091982 (copy Annexure P/4B).
4.
As advertisement was issued on 2181982 for the post of a Lecturer in Dance.
The last date for receipt of applications was 22.9.1982.
The essential qualification for the post as advertised were :-  "(a) consistently good academic record, with the first or High School Class (B+) at the Master's Degree in a relevant subject or an equivalent Degree of a foreign University, and  (b) an M.Phil.
Degree or a recognised degree beyond the Master's Level or published work indicating the capacity of a candidate for independent research work."
5.
Petitioner applied for the post of Lecturer in Dance in response to the above advertisement and was duly selected and was issued an appointment Order on 2071984 (Annexure P/7).
Vide Order dated 2211985 (Annexure P/9) the appointment given to the petitioner was withdrawn by the Respondent-State on the ground that the Punjab Public Service Commission had withdrawn the recommendations regarding the appointment of the petitioner.
It was further mentioned in the Order that this withdrawal of the appointment of the petitioner was in accordance with the judgment of this Court in C.W.P.
Nos. 5482 and 3027 of 1983.
Petitioner filed the present writ petition impugning the Order dated 2211985, by which her appointment had been withdrawn.
The Motion Bench, while admitting the writ petition, had stayed the operation of the impugned order.
6.
Before adverting to the arguments of the learned counsel for the parties, it may be observed here that in C.W.P.
Nos. 5482 and 3027 of 1983, to which reference has been made in the impugned order, it had been decided that relevant date for seeing the qualifications of a candidate is the last date for submitting the applications and if by that date, a candidate does not have the requisite qualifications, then appointment cannot be made of such a person.
7.
According to the respondents, the petitioner had obtained the Degree in MA in Dance from Panjab University on 14101982 and the last date for submission of the applications was 22.9.1982 and since the petitioner did not have the requisite qualifications till that date, she could not have been offered appointment.
8.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has not seriously disputed the proposition of Law laid down in the judgment rendered in the above-referred to writ petitions.
He, however, submitted that in fact petitioner had also Degree of MA in Dance from Prayag Sangeet Samiti, Allahabad, which she had obtained in the year 1970 and as per the qualifications for the post as advertised (reproduced above), she could not be held to be not qualified on the last date for the submission of the applications.
He further submitted that during the pendency of the writ petition, another advertisement was issued for the post of Lecturer in Dance and as a matter of abundant caution, petitioner had again applied for the said post and was selected in February, 1988.
9.
According to the learned counsel for the respondents, a Degree of MA in Dance from Prayag Sangeet Samiti, Allahabad stands de-recognised by the Punjab Government for the post of Lecturer in Dance.
In support of his contention, learned counsel drew my attention to a letter received from the Secretary, Punjab Govt. Education Department by the Secretary, Punjab Public Service Commission, Patiala dated 1271978, which reads as under :-  "I am directed to invite your attention to your letter No. RG 613/77/6201 dated 2731978 and the write that after the implementation of UGC grades recruitment of college Lecturers is to be made as per the qualifications prescribed by them.
Out of the qualifications included by you in your advertisement for Lecturer in Music, the degrees of the following institutions have been derecognised by the Panjab University, Chandigarh and the Guru Nanak Dev University Amritsar :- i) Akhil Bharti Gandharv Mahavidyal Mandal, Miraj  ii) Paryag Sangeet College, Lucknow.
iii) Bhatkhande Sangeet College, Lucknow.
The qualifications forwarded by the Director, Public Instructions, Punjab in 1974 for the post of Lecturer in Music have no value after the implementation of UGC grade.
You are therefore requested to advertise only those qualifications which are essential for Lecturers in other subjects."
10.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties.
I am of the view that the arguments of the learned counsel for the petitioner must prevail.
According to the qualifications for the post in question, which have already been reproduced above, the only requirement is a Master's Degree in the relevant subject or an equivalent degree of a foreign University.
It is nowhere mentioned that this Degree has to be one which is recognised by the affiliating Universities i.e. Punjab University, Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar or the Punjabi University, as the case may be.
Moreover, I find that letter dated 1271978 from the Secretary, Punjab Govt. Education Department which has been reproduced above, only relates to the qualifications for lecturers in Music in the advertisement dated 2731978.
It was specifically mentioned in that advertisement for the post of Lecturer in Music, a candidate should possess a degree of MA in Music from the concerned branch or its equivalent qualifications i.e. Sangeet Parveen, Paryag Sangeet Samiti, Allahabad (Master of Music) or for some other institutions which were mentioned.
It was perhaps under these circumstances that the letter dated 1271978 cannot be issued because Panjab University and Guru Nanak Dev University had derecognised the Degree in Music from Prayag Sangeet Samiti, Allahabad.
No letter or notification had been brought to my notice by which the Punjab Govt. may have derecognised the Degrees from Prayag Sangeet Samiti, Allahabad.
Moreover, as observed above, even the Panjab University and Guru Nanak Dev University had only derecognised the degrees for the post of Lecturer in Music.
11.
Apart from what has been observed above, the equity is also in favour of the petitioner.
Even according to the respondents, there was a technical flaw in her appointment in-as-much though at the time of her appointment on 20.7.1984, she had a degree of MA in Dance from the Panjab University, but on the last date for the submission of the application i.e. 22.9.1982, she did not have the qualification as her result was declared on 14101982.
She was again selected in the year 1988 and in fact is continuing in service from 1972 onwards.
Though after withdrawing of her appointment vide offer Annexure P9, she was continuing in service by virtue of stay order by this Court, but from February, 1988, she was continuing in her own right having been selected again.
On this ground also, the petitioner is entitled to the relief claimed by her.
12.
In view of the above discussion, it is held that the petitioner was duly qualified on the basis of a Degree of MA in Dance obtained from Prayag Sangeet Samiti, Allahabad, when she had applied for the post in the year 1982 and her appointment could not have been withdrawn.
13.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is allowed and the impugned order dated 2211985 (Annexure P/9) is quashed.
Resultantly petitioner would be entitled to all consequential benefits.
There will be no order as to costs.
14.
In the Civil Misc. application No. 126 of 1988, the petitioner had prayed that she should be granted the increments.
No decision was being taken by the respondents on the question of grant of increments, as according to them the said matter was to be decided after the decision of the writ petition.
Since, I have allowed the writ petition and quashed the impugned order, Annexure P-9 the respondents are directed to decide the case of increments and other consequential benefits to the petitioner arising out of the quashing of the impugned order, within a period of three months from the date of the receipt of the order.
The arrears etc. so calculated would be paid to the petitioner within one month after the decision regarding the increments and the consequential benefits.
If the payment of the arrears etc. is not made within the stipulated period as above, the petitioner would be entitled to interest on the said amount at the rate of 12% per annum from the date the amount fell due till the date of payment.
Petition allowed.
v