NC Jain, J - This appeal has been preferred by the defendants State of Punjab and others against the plaintiff-respondent against the judgments and decrees of the courts below decreeing the suit of the plaintiff-Joginder Singh.
2.
The plaintiff Joginder Singh joined the Punjab Police Department as a constable on 5121961.
He was promoted as Head Constable with effect from 26.6.1977 on ad hoc basis and was regularised on this post on 27.9.1979.
He was placed under suspension when he was Incharge of the Punjab Armed Police on the basis of his alleged misbehaviour with the Lines Officer.
After the departmental inquiry was held, he was found guilty.
The Commandant 75th Bn.
P.A.P.
Jalandhar imposed a penalty of forfeiture of three years approved service with permanent effect vide order dated 27.4.1981.
The afore-mentioned order was challenged by the plaintiff on the ground that he was not supplied with copies of documents relied by the department and that the same was in contravention of the provisions of Police Rules in general.
The suit of the plaintiff was decreed by the trial Court and the appeal filed by the defendants was dismissed by the first appellate court.
Aggrieved against the judgments and decrees of the courts below, the defendants have filed Regular Second Appeal before this Hon'ble Court.
3.
It has been found by the courts below that the punishment of forfeiture of approved service of three years is not permissible under the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 (for short the Rules).
In support of his defence Rule 162 of the Rules was relied upon by the counsel for the respondent.
4.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and after going through the findings recorded by the courts below and the relevant rules on the point, this Court is of the firm view that there is no merit in the appeal.
Rule 162. of the Punjab Police Rules specifies certain kinds of punishments to be inflicted but nowhere lays down that approved service of a police personnel with permanent effect can be forfeited.
The defendants cannot take advantage from column No. 3 of Rule 162 of the rules wherein punishment of stoppage of increment or forfeiture of approved service for increment can be inflicted.
The punishment of stoppage of increment or forfeiture of approved service for increment cannot be interpreted to mean that the approved service of a police official with permanent effect can be forfeited.
Approved service for increment can be forfeited but not the approved service for a period of three years with permanent effect affecting the rights of a police constable for the purposes of gratuity, pension and seniority.
The underlying object in not vesting the authorities, under the above-mentioned provisions, with powers to forfeit approved service with permanent effect appears to be that an official should not suffer for all times to come in the matter of gratuity, pension and seniority, otherwise, there was no difficulty in making such a provision.
In somewhat similar circumstances Delhi High Court in Ram Pat v Union of India and others, 1984(3) SLR 756 did not approve the action of the authorities by which the approved service of a police official for one year permanently entailing reduction in pay was forfeited.
For the reasons recorded above, the appeal of the appellant is dismissed leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Appeal dismissed.