HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner who was Lower Division Clerk was retired from service on the ground of medical unfitness on April 30, 1977, vide order Annexure P-2 dated April 11, 1975.
The petitioner repesented to the authorities that the Board that had found him medically unfit resulting in his retirement had not been properly constituted and as such, the opinion of the Medical Officer who conducted the medical board proceedings could not be taken into account.
This representation was accepted and vide order Annexure P-7 dated October 27, 1979, he was reinstated in service, in pursuance whereof he actually rejoined his duties on November 134, 1979.
The order Annexure P-7 laid down the conditions under which the petitioner was to be reinstated and it was directed as under :-  a) Pay - The pay on re-instatement will be fixed from the date of such reinstatement at the stage it would have reached but for the discharge.
The period of break in service will be counted for increment in the time scale of pay of the post, but no arrears of pay and allowances will be paid for this period.
b) Retirement benefits :-  i) The break in service will be condoned for purpose of continuity of service but the break itself will not count for pension.
ii) You will be required to refund to the Government any guilty or other terminal benefits paid to you at the time of discharge.
e) The period of break itself will not count for any other purpose.
The petitioner has impugned the aforesaid stipulations by way of the present writ petition.
2.
It is the admitted case of the parties that the petitioner was once again in pursuance of medical board proceedings recorded vide Annexure P-8, on December 5, 1979, retired from service on the ground of medical unfitness.
It has been conceded before me that he has since died and his legal representatives have been brought on record.
3.
The stand of the writ petitioner is that the order of retirement having been set aside by the authorities concerned, it was not open to them to deny him the arrears of pay and allowances and order break in service with the resultant prejudice for the period May 1, 1977 to November, 13, 1979.
He has also pointed out that in column No. 15 of annexure P-8, it has been stated that the patient was having diminished vision for the last six months which made him unfit to carry on his duties as a clerk.
On the basis of this document it has been urged that the order Annexure P-2 was without any basis as the petitioner had developed vision about six months prior to December 5, 1979 when the medical examination recorded in Annexure P-8 had been made.
4.
The broad facts have not been denied in the written statement, but it has been urged that cause of action had accrued to the petitioner at Rajouri and as such, this Court had no territorial jurisdiction in the matter and that the petitioner having accepted reinstatement on the conditions laid down in Annexure P-7, he could not now go back and challenge the same.
5.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and going through the record, I find that the petition deserves to succeed.
It has been held by this Court in Smt. Raj Rani v. State of Punjab and others, 1991(2) SCT 729 that if an order of retirement on account of medical disability is withdrawn, it will be deemed as if it had never been passed.
Moreover, I find even on the facts of the case as evidenced by Annexure P-8, that there was no proper material before the authorities concerned when the first order of retirement i.e. Annexure P2 was passed.
The authorities had accepted the representation of the petitioner challenging as being without jurisdiction the proceedings before the so-called First Medical Board.
It is also apparent from a reading of Annexure P-8, that the disability had occurred to the petitioner about six months prior to 5.12.1979 i.e. the date of the Second Board.
The order of 1977 was, therefore, without any basis.
The argument of learned counsel for the respondents with regard to the territorial jurisdiction of this court also has no merit.
Admittedly, the order Annexure P-7 which has been impugned before me was received by the petitioner in Barnala, which is situated in the State of Punjab.
The cause of action in favour of the petitioner has therefore arisen withiin the territorial jurisdiction of this Court.
6.
In view of what has been stated above the present petition is allowed and a direction is issued to the respondents to recalculate all the benefits that would have accrued to the petitioner by treating the period May 1, 1977 to November 13, 1979 as period spent on duty for all intents and purposes.
The entire exercise would be completed by the respondents within a period of six months from today and all benefits that emanate from this judgments shall be passed on to the legal representatives within a period of two months thereafter.
There will, however, be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.