Harjit Singh Bedi, J - The petitioners are students of Part-I of the Diploma Course in Pharmacy presently admitted in the Maharishi College of Pharmacy, Taraori, district Karnal, respondent No. 3 to the petition.
They were admitted to the course in question for the academic session 1990-91.
The courses of study, admission to the Institutions, imparting training in the subject of Pharmacy and other ancillary matters are dealt with under the Pharmacy Act, 1948 (hereinafter called the 'Act').
Under section 10 of the Act, the Central Council has been authorised, with the approval of the Central Government, to make regulations for the purpose of imparting education in the subject of Pharmacy.
By virtue of the aforesaid power conferred on the Council, the Pharmacy Council of India framed the Education Regulation of 1981-82, hereinafter called the 'Education Regulations'.
Regulation 3 provides as under :-  "Minimum qualification for admission to course.
Any person who wishes to be admitted as a student to the course of study for Diploma in Pharmacy (Part-I), shall produce to the head of the institution, imparting the training in accordance with these regulations, evidence of having passed -  (a) matriculation examination or a high school examination or a secondary school leaving certificate examination with Chemistry, Physics and Mathematics; (b) any other examination accepted by the Pharmacy Council of India as equivalent to any of the above examinations."
Regulation 4 gives the duration of the training; Regulation 5 the courses of study and Regulation 9 deals with the eligibility for appearing at the examination for Diploma in Pharmacy (Part-I).
It will be apparent from the above that by virtue of Regulation 3 aforequoted, the first requirement for securing admission to Diploma in Pharmacy Part-I is that the prospective candidates must have passed the matriculation examination or a secondary school leaving certificate examination with certain specified subjects.
By virtue of power conferred on the Pharmacy Council by sub-section (2) of Section 12 read with Regulation 12 of the Education Regulations, the State Board of Technical Education, Haryana, hereinafter called the 'Board', had been approved by the Pharmacy Council of India to conduct the examination for the students admitted in the Maharishi College of Pharmacy-respondent No. 3.
It is the case of the petitioners that they had got admission in the aforesaid college as they fulfilled the requirements of Regulation 3 afore-quoted, as they had passed the Matriculation examination from a recognised examination body.
It has been averred that as they had completed the course of study they were eligible to sit in the examination on that account.
The petitioners duly submitted their examination forms for appearing in the examination, but vide order Annexure P-1 dated 26th September, 1991, the Board refused to issue roll numbers to the petitioners supposedly on the ground that at the time of their admission to the College they did not fulfil the minimum requirements for admission, as they did not have 45 per cent marks in the Matriculation Examination.
The petitioners have challenged the validity of Annexure P-1 on the ground that the Board was not in law entitled to lay down any condition with regard to the eligibility to sit in the examination as it had been authorised under section 12(2) of the Act and Regulation 12 to be only on examining body without anything more.
Reliance has been placed by the petitioners on a judgment of this Court reported as Daulat Ram Charitable Trust and another v. State Board of Technical Education, Haryana and others, 1989(6) SLR 269 for this proposition.
During the course of the hearing of this petition, by virtue of the directions issued by this Court, the petitioners were allowed to take the examination and they have, in fact, taken the said examination.
The additional prayer now made by virtue of Civil Miscellaneous Application No. 8089 of 1991 is that the result of the examination be declared  2.
A written statement on behalf of respondents 1 and 2 has been filed controverting the allegations made by the petitioners.
It has been asserted that the petitioners were not allowed to sit in the examination as they did not have the requisite 45 per cent marks as required by the prospectus issued by the Board for admission to the course in question.
It has been admitted that the Board is only an examining body, but it has been asserted that an examining body is always competent to lay down the minimum standard of educational qualification to be possessed by those students who were to be examined.
It has also been stated that the Pharmacy Council of India, which was competent to lay down the qualifications, had provided for the minimum standards in the Education Regulations and had left it open to the Board to prescribe higher/stricter conditions, if so desired, vide Annexure R-1 dated 27th February, 1987.
It has been clarified that it was under the authority, conferred vide Annexure R-1 by the Pharmacy Council of India itself, that the Board put a condition of per cent marks in the Matriculation examination for admission to the first year Diploma course in question.
3.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length.
Mr. Ram Lal Gupta, counsel for the petitioners, has urged three points before me.
He has first argued that the functions/duties of the College respondent No. 3 and the Board-respondent No. 1 are governed by the Act and the Education Regulations and they have to be confined within their respective spheres.
He has also urged that the petitioners had been admitted to the College on the basis of the prospectus issued by it and the only qualification provided in that prospective was that the prospective candidates should have passed the Matriculation Examination.
4.
Admittedly, the Education Regulations have been framed by the Pharmacy Council by virtue of powers conferred by section 10 of the Act and, as such, these regulations have statutory force.
It is also the admitted case of the parties that the Education Regulations give full description as to the nature/course, of study and all other ancillary matters relating to the Diploma in Pharmacy Part-I and Part-IIA.
By virtue of sub-section (2) of Section 12 and Regulation 12, the Board has only been authorised to conduct the examination on behalf of the Pharmacy Council.
It is, therefore, apparent that the Board has no independent entity in so far as matters other than conduct of the examination are concerned.
The eligibility for admission to the course in question or the examination is clearly set out by the Education Regulations and the Board is not competent to deviate from them.
This has been so held by this Court in Daulat Ram Charitable Trust's case (supra), wherein it was held in para No. 15 that the Board could not be allowed to control the admission of students to the course in question but its only function was to conduct the examination on the basis of the Education Regulations.
For arriving at its conclusion, the learned Judge in the aforesaid case placed reliance on another decision of the Court in C.W.P.
No. 5996 of 1986 (Ajaib Singh and others v. Haryana State Board of Technical Education and others) decided on 9th March, 1987, in which it was held that the authority which conducted the courses for the study of Pharmacy i.e. Pharmacy Council and the authority which held the examination in Pharmacy i.e. the Board had to function within their prescribed spheres in the manner circumscribed by the Regulations.
The Hon'ble Judge in the aforesaid case, while considering the scope of Regulation 10 of the Education Regulations which provided for the entitlement to appear in the examination for Diploma in Pharmacy Part-IIA conducted by the Board, clearly held as under :-  "So, all students who produce certificate from the head of the institution approved for conducting Pharmacy Courses in proof of their having regularly and satisfactorily followed the second year course of study by attending not less than 75 per cent classes held and having successfully passed the examination for Diploma in Pharmacy (Part-I) shall be eligible for appearing at the examination for Diploma in Pharmacy (Part-III-A) Respondent No. 1 has no discretion to decline permission to such candidates to appear in the examination."
5.
Mr. Koshal, appearing for the respondent-Board, has sought to justify the action of the Board by taking the shelter of Annexure R-1 to the reply.
I think, the argument raised by the learned counsel is misplaced.
Annexure R-1 is merely a clarification issued by the Secretary of the Pharmacy Council and there is nothing in the written statement to show as to what was the legal basis for the issuance of the clarification.
It has not been made clear as to whether the aforesaid clarification had the formal sanction of the Pharmacy Council itself and, in the face of statutory Regulation 3, Annexure R-1 can have no legal status.
6.
Mr. Gupta's second argument must also prevail.
He has urged that the petitioners had been admitted for the academic session 1990-91 on the basis of the prospectus issued by the College which did not provide for 45 per cent marks in the Matriculation examination and as such, they could not be penalised on account of some default on the part of the College.
For this proposition of law, he has laid primary emphasis on A. Sudha v. University of Mysore and another, AIR 1987 SC 2305; Rajendra Prasad Mathur v. Karnataka University Vijay Kumar Sharma v. Karnataka University, AIR 1986 SC 1448, Shri Krishan v. The Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra, AIR 1991 SC 376 and The Punjab School Education Board, SAS Nagar v. Harinder Kaur Chandhok (Minor), AIR 1991 P&H 31.
In A. Sudha's case (supra) the Supreme Court while agreeing with the respondents that the appellant did not have the requisite qualifying marks to get admission did not cancel it on the ground that she had completed the first year of MBBS Class and was innocent in securing admission as she had relied on a representation made by the College authorities.
The other judgments cited above are to the same effect and fully support the case of the petitioners.
7.
Mr. Gupta has also urged, relying on paragraph 19 of the writ petition and the reply filed thereto, that the Board itself had allowed students studying in other institutions to appear in the examination although they did not have the requisite 45 per cent marks and were not eligible to secure admission in the course, Respondent No. 1, in reply, has stated that the condition of 45 per cent marks was relaxed with regard to Lord Shiva College of Pharmacy, Sirsa, but that was for the year 1989-90 and, in fact, no relaxation was given to any institution for the year 1990-91.
They have further stated that the relaxation of conditions of eligibility for admission was a concession and it could not be claimed by the petitioners as a matter of right.
I am of the view that the stand of the respondents is untenable.
The relaxation of the conditions of eligibility for seeking admission to a college or an examination cannot be dubbed as a concession given to a student.
Conditions of eligibility must have universal application and if relaxation is given with respect to one institution, it should be uniformally applied to all other institutions, as well.
It is also clear from the reply filed that the Board itself has not considered that the requirement of securing 45 per cent marks is inviolable as, in that eventuality, the relaxation could not have been given for the academic session 1989-90 in the case of Lord Shiva College of Pharmacy, Sirsa.
For this additional reason also, I feel that the petitioners are entitled to succeed.
8.
For the reasons recorded above, this petition is allowed with costs, which I quantify at Rs. 1000/- and direct the respondent-Board to declare the results of the petitioner forthwith.
9.
In view of what has been stated above, CM No. 8089 of 1991 is rendered infructuous and dismissed as such.
Petition allowed.