Harjit Singh Bedi, J - By this judgment we purpose to dispose of CWP Nos. 5744, 7187 of 1988, 121, 122 and 8128 of 1990.
The facts of the case have been culled out from C.W.P.
No. 5744 of 1988.
2.
The petitioners joined the service of the Haryana Agro Industries Corporation Ltd (Respondent No. 2) between the years 1969-1983 as tractor operators, mechanics, helpers, security guards, store-keepers etc.
The petitioners are averred to the matriculates, ITI Diploma Holders and non-matrics and are alleged to have been appointed against the posts for which they were duly qualified.
As per the averments made in the writ petition, the petitioners were allocated to the various units/plants which were being run by respondent No. 2.
In addition to about nine such units/plants, respondent No. 2 was also running farmers service centres at various places in the State of Haryana.
It appears, as per the agenda Annexure P-1 issued by the respondent-Corporation to the Directors for its 98th meeting to be held on 30th September, 1987, that almost all the units and the service centres being run under the control of the respondent-Corporation were running into substantial losses.
It was pointed out specifically that the tractor hiring activity had never given any profit mainly due to the facts that it was overstaffed and the services rendered by the unit were under utilized.
It was also pointed out that certain other units, including the Haryana Agro Combine Unit, Nilokheri, were also running into losses.
It was proposed in the agenda that although all the units were running into losses, only the Solvent Extraction Plant at Kaithal, Agro Aviation Wing at Pinjore and the tractor hiring and repairing workshops be closed down.
As a consequence of this closure it was tabulated that about 225 employees were likely to be rendered surplus and retrenched.
It was also proposed that in order to meet the problem of the surplus staff, the Corporation would reorganise its activities by opening 33 new sales centres and certain other avenues which would absorb about 128 employees.
The agenda was duly approved by the Board of Directors in the meeting held on 30th September, 1987.
It was also thereafter substantially approved by the high -level committee constituted by the State Government for a review of the working of the sick industrial units of the Corporation.
It appears, however, that the high -level committee did not take any decision on the question for retrenchment and absorption/re-employment of the employees, who were being rendered surplus.
Apprehending that the services of these employees were likely to be retrenched, CWP No. 5401 of 1988 (Dayal Singh & ors. v. State of Haryana etc.) and filed in this Court and came up for hearing on 21st June, 1988 when it was pointed out by the counsel appearing for the Corporation that the scheme for retrenchment, which is Annexure P-1 in the present case, had been withdrawn and a new scheme would be framed.
On this, the aforesaid writ petition was disposed of as having become infructuous.
Thereafter, a new scheme of retrenchment/absorption was circulated as an agenda item for the meeting of the Board of Directors scheduled for 20th June, 1988.
A copy of the agenda dated 17th June, 1988 is attached with the petition as Annexure P-5 and the minutes of the meeting as Annexure P-6.
The petitioners have challenged the old and the revised schemes on various grounds taken by them.
In the agenda item circulated to the Board of Directors for the meetings to be held on 30th September, 1987, and 20th June, 1988, the pointed attention of the Board was drawn to the losses that had been incurred by the Corporation and proposals were mooted for revitalization of the Corporation which could only be successfully accomplished, if the units running into losses were closed.
It was finally agreed that only two units i.e. Haryana Combine Unit, Nilokheri, and the Tractor Hiring and Repairing Workshop would be closed down as the expert committee which had gone into the matter had come to the conclusion that some of the other losing units could be resuscitcated by making suitable inputs, and taking remedial action.
3.
Mr. JC Verma has first and foremost argued that the assertion of the Corporation that the Haryana Agro Combine Unit, Nilokheri, was running into losses was factually incorrect as the said unit was, in fact, making some profits.
He has argued that this closure was, therefore, contrary to the policy laid down vide Annexures P-1 and P-5.
He has also urged that the Haryana Agro Foods and Fruits Processing Plant at Murthal, which was, in fact, running into substantial losses had not been closed.
In reply to this averment, it has been stated in the written statement filed on behalf of the Corporation that it was proposed to close down the Tractor Hiring and Repairing Workshops and the Haryana Agro Combine Unit, Nilokheri, as they were not only economically unviable but had also outlived their utility as tractors and combine harvesters now being available in large numbers with individual farmers, there was not much demand for this service.
It has also been pointed out that viability has to be seen not only in terms of the minor profits that might accrue to the Corporation, but also in terms of investments, running expenses in working capital, interests etc.
It has also been stated that the assessment report prepared by a firm of Chartered Accountants requisitioned by the Corporation in the year 1985 had recommended that the tractor and combine hiring unit should be disbanded.
With regard to the units which were alleged to have suffered losses and were yet being allowed to continue, it was mentioned in the written statement that on an examination of the entire matter through an agency of experts, it had been determined that given the requisite inputs in terms of finance and the necessary plant & machinery and also keeping in view the projected demand for the finished products, it was not advisable to close down such plants.
Pointed attention was drawn in the written statement to the Haryana Food and Fruits Processing Plant, Murthal, and the Haryana Agro Fertilizer and Chemical Plant, Shahbad, wherein it has been stated that these units could be revitalized in the manner indicated above.
4.
After examining the arguments raised with reference to the pleadings of the parties, we are of the view that the argument addressed by Mr. Verma is untenable.
Undoubtedly, it was for the Corporation itself, acting as a prudent manager, to decide as to which units were to be retained and which were to be closed and, for this purpose, it was open to the Corporation to consider the situation as then prevailing and also to visualise and look into the future.
It is with this factual background that some to the units which were at that time running into losses were allowed to continue to function, as in the opinion of the Corporation, they could be revitalized.
In any case, even if it is taken that these losing units too should have been closed, that would not in any way help the case of the petitioners as the closure of those units would increase the number of employees which would be retrenched with no corresponding benefit to the petitioners.
5.
It has been pointed out by Mr. Verma that amongst the various categories of the retrenched workmen the tractor operators were the ones who had been the greatest sufferers.
He averred that even prior to their retrenchment, tractor operators had been posted as salesmen in the sales centres and in view of the fact that the Corporation had itself decided to increase substantially the number of such centres (as the Corporation had been granted agencies to supply diesel engines, electric motors and other farming equipments and inputs), there was no need to retrench such tractor Operators.
In reply to this averment, it has been pointed out by the Corporation that as on 30th September, 1987 there were 69 tractor operators and only 17 operational tractors with the result that some of the surplus tractor operators had to be accommodated on other duties.
It was also stated that the qualifications laid down for appointment as Supervisors in the sales centres disqualified almost all the tractor operators as they had no experience in the sale/service of diesel engines, electric motors/pumps etc.
It is also stated that the principle of 'last come first go' had to be kept in view and the retrenchment was to be confined on that basis to each category of employees as per the requirements of section 25-G of the Industrial Disputes Act (hereinafter called the Act).
We are of the view that even on this point Mr. Verma cannot succeed.
It may be true that some of the tractor operators had been seconded to work against the post of salesmen, but in view of the diversified nature of activity of the Corporation, it was felt that such tractor operators were not duly qualified or suitable for the job.
We are also of the view that the principle of 'last come first go' would have to be applied in each category of workmen and, as such, retrenchment would have to be effected on that basis.
6.
The final argument addressed by Mr. Verma is that the provisions of Section 25-N and 25-O of the Act had been violated while ordering retrenchment of the surplus employees.
In this connection, he had urged that the requisite notice and the prior permission from the appropriate Government and the procedure laid down, as envisaged by the aforesaid sections had not been followed.
We are of the view that this argument is misplaced.
Chapter (??)
v-8 of the Act provides for special provisions relating to lay-off, retrenchment and closure of certain establishments.
Section 25-K of the Act is reproduced hereunder :  "25-K Application of Chapter V-B-(1).
The provisions of the Chapter shall apply to an industrial establishment (not being an establishment of a seasonal character or in which -work is performed only intermittently) in which not less than (one) hundred workmen were employed on an average per working day for the preceding twelve months."
It will be apparent from a reading of the aforesaid section that where the establishment is not of a seasonal character, the provisions of this Chapter would apply where the workmen employed are not less than one hundred on an average per working day for the preceding twelve months.
It has been pointed out in the written statement that the number of workmen employed under each of the two units, which are sought to be closed, were, in fact, less than one hundred.
Mr. Verma's argument that in determining the number of workmen employed in terms of Section 25-K of the Act, the total strength in the entire Corporation is to be taken into account and not to be confined only to the individual units.
For this purpose, he has relied upon the judgments reported as The Associated Cement Corporation v. Their Workmen, A.I.R. 1960 SC 56 RC Cooper v. Union of India, A.I.R. 1970 SC 564 and A.S. Production Agencies v. Industrial Tribunal, Haryana, A.I.R. 1979 S.C. 170.
We find that Mr. Verma cannot derive any benefit from these judgments, as these being distinguishable on facts, are not relevant to the facts of the case.
In view of the legal proposition as we see it, sections 25-N and 25-O of the Act, which occur in Chapter V-B, would not be applicable in the present case.
7.
While the writ petition was still pending, Civil Miscellaneous Application No. 6207 of 1990 was filed by the respondent-Corporation in which it has been stated that out of the total number of 121 employees who had been finally retrenched, more than 60 had been absorbed in other State Government undertakings.
It has also been pointed out during the course of arguments that additionally another 17 tractor drivers were sought to be absorbed in the Haryana Agricultural Marketing Board.
It is obvious therefore that the respondent-Corporation, being fully conscious of the difficulties faced by the retrenched employees, is making efforts to absorb or adjust them elsewhere.
We do appreciate the hardship that is being faced by such employees and, as such, we hope and trust that all unadjusted employees will be accommodated in the same way as expeditiously as possible.
8.
This court, while sitting on the writ side, must balance the public against the private interest and it would be wholly against the public interest to foist the retrenched workmen on the Corporation which, as stated in Civil Misc. No. 6207 of 1990, has made a paltry profit of Rs. 1770 lacs for the first time during the financial year 1989-90.
It has also been mentioned in the aforesaid civil miscellaneous application that should the scheme of retrenchment be set aside, the Corporation would incur a financial liability of over Rs. 1 crore and a recurring liability of Rs. 35 lacs per month.
We are of the view that if the workmen are foisted on the Corporation, it would spell its financial doom.
9.
For the reasons recorded above, we find no merit in the present bunch of writ petitions and accordingly dismiss the same but with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.