N Pandey, J - This writ application has been filed for quashing the order of dismissal of the petitioner from service passed on 1791985 (Annexure-11) by Respondent No. 4 as also for quashing the order passed by respondent No. 3 rejecting the petitioner's appeal, as contained in Annexure 18.
2.
At the relevant time the petitioner was serving as officer-in-charge, Routa Police Station in the District of Purnea.
On 2531985, the petitioner was served with draft charge dated 21.12.1984 issued by Respondent No. 5 containing inter alia, three charges.
The first charge was that in the night of 5/6.11.84, the petitioner was found in drunken state in the room of the daughter of Suleman.
He was in civil dress but armed with Government revolver.
The villagers after noticing the petitioner in a room with the daughter of Suleman, collected there and locked them from outside.
An information was given to the Additional Superintendent of Police and other officials.
On receiving such information the aforementioned officials arrived there and they unlocked the rook and removed the petitioner alongwith the daughter of Suleman.
The second charge was that in the night of 5.11.84, the petitioner assaulted Md Tazuddin and removed Rs. 5,000/- from his pocket.
It is said that said Tazuddin who is a businessman had gone to Rauta Bazar in connection with his business.
Md Tajuddin made above-mentioned allegations before the Additional Superintendent of Police and recorded his statement.
The third charge was that from the aforementioned two actions of the petitioner, the Police Department sustained great injuries to its prestige.
The copy of the charge has been annexed with the writ petition and marked as Annexure-4.
3.
The petitioner submitted this explanation and denied the charges.
It was submitted that in the night of 5/6.11.84 at about 200 hrs.
the petitioner got confidential information that Jail Mastan, a verternan criminal alongwith his associates were seen going from Nala towards the house of Chuni Bi, the daughter of Suleman.
The petitioner apprehending that the criminal may commit some offence.
recorded station dairy and proceeded to the house of Chunni Bi.
After deputing the defadar and chowkidar outside the house of Chuni Bi, the petitioner entered the house to search the criminals.
No sooner the petitioner entered the house of Chunni Bi, some of the villagers locked the room of the house from outside.
In the aforementioned background, the petitioner submitted in his show cause that he was innocent and it was the gunda elements of the locality, who got him implicated.
4.
Thereafter Respondent No. 5 started departmental proceeding against the petitioner and appointed Shri Ganesh Prasad Yadav, the then Deputy Superintendent of Police, Araria to conduct the departmental proceeding.
The conducting officer examined the witnesses, perused the records and after considering the evidence exonerated the petitioner of all the charges.
According to the conducting officer, no legal evidence was brought on the record on behalf of the prosecution to substantiate the charges.
On the basis of the aforesaid findings the conducting officer submitted his report to Respondent No. 5 on 16785 (Annexure-8).
5.
The Respondent No. 5 on receipt of the report of the conducting officer issued show cause notice on 3171985 asking the petitioner as to why he be not removed from service.
The petitioner pursuant to the aforesaid notice, submitted his show cause on 14.8.1985.
Respondent No.5 thereafter considered the show cause of the petitioner.
He also considered the statement of the other witnesses including the statement of Chuni Bi, recorded before the Additional Superintendent of Police, Shri Paswan.
He did not agree with the report of the conducting office dated 16785.
Thereafter, Respondent No. 5 transmitted the records alongwith his report dated 28885 (Annexure-10) to the Deputy Inspector General of Police (Respondent No. 4) for final order.
In his report, however, he recommended that the petitioner may be given an opportunity to mend himself and his record of service.
6.
Respondent No. 4 did not agree with the report of the conducting officer.
He perused and considered the statements of all the witnesses, which were recorded before the Additional Superintendent of Police, Mr. Paswan.
Respondent No. 4 held that from the statement of Chuni Bi and other witnesses recorded before Shri Paswan, Additional Superintendent of Police during the post/facto enquiry, the charges against the petitioner were proved.
The petitioner was not a fit person to be retained in police.
He pursued the statement of Chuni Bi, recorded before the Additional Superintendent of Police in which she had made allegation that the petitioner entered her room in drunken condition and spent the night with her in the room.
Thereafter on the basis of the aforementioned, Respondent No. 4 by his order dated 17985 (Annexure-11) passed order for dismissal of the petitioner from service.
7.
Petitioner being aggrieved by the order of dismissal preferred an appeal before the Director General-cum-Inspector General of Police, which was rejected and communicated vide letter dated 521986.
The petitioner, thereafter, preferred revision before the Government which was also dismissed.
Thereafter it appears that the petitioner filed CWJC No. 8252 of 1988 before this court, which was disposed of by order dated 19111988 by a Bench of this court, quashing the order of the Director General-cum-Inspector General of Police, the appellate authority had directed him to dispose of the appeal of the petitioner within three months in accordance with direction issued in the matter.
The order of this court in Annexure-17 to the writ petition.
The Director General-cum-Inspector General of Police heard the matter in accordance with the direction of this court, and by order dated 511989 (Annexure-18) rejected the appeal.
Thereafter the petitioner's revision as also a memorial submitted to the concerned authorities were also rejected.
8.
Mr. Chandra Shekhar, learned counsel, appearing for the petitioner submitted that the impugned order dated 17985 (Annexure-11) dismissing the petitioner from service is illegal and unconstitutional because it violates the principle of natural justice.
It was not open to the disciplinary authority to look into the enquiry report submitted by the Additional Superintendent of Police.
All the witnesses, including Chuni Bi, who were examined by the conducting officer during the course of departmental proceeding, have emphatically denied the allegations levelled against the petitioner.
The conducting officer considered the statement of the witnesses and came to a conclusion that the prosecution had failed to establish the charges against the petitioner.
According to Mr. Chandra Shekhar it was not open to the disciplinary authority to look into the statements of the witnesses, which were recorded before the Additional Superintendent of Police during the post-facto enquiry.
These statements were recorded in the absence of the petitioner.
The petitioner was not given an opportunity to cross-examine the witnesses.
In law such statements are not permissible for consideration in a departmental proceeding.
The conducing officer in his report had noted that during the course of post-facto enquiry witnesses were examined but he did not rely on such statement.
Therefore, he had submitted that the order of dismissal is ultra vires to the provisions of Articles 311(2) of the Constitution of India.
9.
A counter-affidavit has been filed on behalf of the State.
It has been stated that sufficient materials were produced by the prosecution before the conducting officer in order to establish that the petitioner was found in a drunken condition in the room of Chuni Bi, on the alleged date of occurrence.
The report of the Additional Superintendent of Police which was prepared on the basis of the statement of the wintesses, including Chuni Bi, was produced before the conducting officer and marked as exhibit.
At the same time the statement of Chuni Bi and other witnesses recorded by the Additional Superintendent of Police was also produced before the conducting officer and they were also marked as exhibit.
The Additional Superintendent of Police, after conducting preliminary enquiry and examining the witnesses, had given opportunity to the petitioner to submit explanation into the charges.
Copies of the enquiry report and the statement of the witnesses were furnished to the petitioner before initiation of the departmental proceeding.
It has further been submitted that since Sri Paswan, Additional Superintendent of Police had retired from service, he was not examined as a witness in the departmental proceeding but, however, his report was exhibited.
In the counter-affidavit it has also been stated that only because Chuni Bi in her statement before the conducting officer changed her statement before in order to favour the petitioner, it cannot be said that no such occurrence took place.
A large number of public assembled at the place of occurrence, surrounded the house of Chuni Bi and confined them inside the room and locked the same from outside.
The said room was opened in presence of the then Additional Superintendent of Police, the Sub-Divisional Magistrate and the armed force.
10.
Learned Counsel appearing for the state placing reliance over the contents of the counter-affidavit submitted that sufficient materials were brought before the conducting officer to support the charges against the petitioner.
The conducting officer should have relied upon the report of the then Additional Superintendent of Police.
He should have also relied upon the statements of the witnesses recorded before the then Additional Superintendent of Police.
He has further submitted that although the conducting officer, in his report, submitted that the prosecution failed to establish the charges against the petitioner, the disciplinary authority had every right to differ with the report of the conducting officer.
It would appear from the impugned order that the disciplinary authority considered the enquiry report of the then Additional Superintendent of Police.
He has also considered the statement of Chuni Bi as also the statements of other witnesses recorded before the then Additional Superintendent of Police.
The disciplinary authority was perfectly justified incoming to the conclusion that upon consideration of the materials the petitioner was found guilty of the charges.
11.
From bare reference to the facts of the case, it is apparent that his was a very unfortunate case.
The petitioner being a police officer was caught locked in a room alongwith Chuni Bi by the then Additional Superintendent of Police and also other officials.
According to the report of the Additional Superintendent of Police, it appears that Chuni Bi and other persons had supported the charges against the petitioner during the post-facto enquiry which was conducted by the Additional Superintendent of Police.
It is unfortunate that Chuni Bi and other witnesses of the prosecution denied before the conducting officer that any occurrence in the matter it has been alleged took place.
In the aforesaid unfortunate circumstances several authorities of Police Department, including the disciplinary authority has shown their reaction and concluded that the petitioner was not a fit person to retain in service.
But it has to be seen that how long as per rule of prudence and principle of natural justice, the reaction of the authorities can stand the state of law.
12.
I have already noticed that the conducting officer in his report submitted that the prosecution failed to prove the charges against the petitioner.
I have also noticed that Chuni Bi as also other witnesses for the prosecution have not supported the prosecution story rather they have made favourable statement to the petitioner.
The report of the then Additional Superintendent of Police and the statement of the witnesses recorded before him were also produced on the record.
The disciplinary authority did not agree with the report of the conducting officer and passed order for dismissal.
It is well-known that the disciplinary authority is not bound by the opinion of the enquiring officer in a departmental proceeding.
It is upto the disciplinary authority either to agree with those findings or to take a contrary view.
Reference in this connection may be made to the cases of Railway Board, New Delhi and another v. Niranjan Singh, AIR 1969 SC 966; Tara Chand Khatari v. Municipal Corporation, Delhi, AIR 1977 SC 567 and Shyam Bihari Singh v. The Chairman, State Bank of India and others, 1985 PLJR 185.
From bare reference to the aforesaid decisions, it would appear that the disciplinary authority is not bound by the opinion of the enquiring officer in a departmental proceeding.
Therefore, it cannot be urged that the disciplinary authority could not have come to his independent conclusion on the basis of the material on the record.
13.
But the question the emerges for consideration in the present case is as to whether it was open to the disciplinary authority to consider the report of post-facto enquiry submitted by the then Additional Superintendent of Police.
The answer is very plain and simple that in a case of Government Servant it is not open to the disciplinary authority to place reliance over a report prepared during the post-facto enquiry, if the attention of the delinquent was not drawn at the stage of the departmental proceedings towards such report and the maker of such report was not examined.
Admittedly, in the present case Shri Paswan, the then Additional Superintendent of Police was not examined during the course of departmental proceeding.
It would further appear that the disciplinary authority has placed reliance over the statement of the witnesses including Chuni Bi recorded before the then Additional Superintendent of Police.
At the time when the statements of the aforesaid witnesses were recorded, the petitioner was not given an opportunity to cross-examine them.
the fundamental principle of natural justice demands that the witnesses to be examed by the departmental authority must be examined in presence of the delinquent after giving on advance information about the date of examination of such witnesses as also providing an opportunity to cross-examine them.
After examining the witnesses on behalf of the department, the delinquent staff should be called upon to adduce oral evidence.
These are the fundamentals of departmental enquiry.
This is not the case of the State that during the course of post-factor enquiry the petitioner was given an opportunity to cross-examine the witnesses whose statements were recorded by Shri Paswan, the then Additional Superintendent of Police.
Thus it is evident that the enquiry report of Shri Paswan as also the statement of witnesses recorded by him were not the materials collected bring the course of departmental proceeding.
Thus in law it has to be held that whatever materials have been considered by the disciplinary authority were collected behind the back of the petitioner.
It has to be noticed that the witnesses, including Chuni Bi denied the allegation against the petitioner before the conducting officer.
The prosecution had knowledge that the witnesses have denied their stand in order to help the petitioner.
The prosecution had also knowledge that those witnesses had made specific allegations against the petitioner before the then Additional Superintendent of Police.
But in spite of the aforesaid, the attention of the witnesses was not drawn to the extent that they had made different statements before the then Additional Superintendent of Police.
14.
Therefore, I am left with no option but to hold that the order of dismissal of the petitioner was in complete breach of the provision of Article 311 of the Constitution of India.
15.
It is well known that the High Court is generally reluctant in interfering with the order passed by the disciplinary authority against its employee in a departmental proceeding.
But taking all the facts and circumstances of the case into consideration, I am of the opinion that it is just and proper that the disciplinary authority should apply his mind afresh to the materials collected during the course of departmental proceeding.
Accordingly, I allow the writ petition and quash the impugned order dated 17985 (Annexure-II) and direct the disciplinary authority to apply his mind afresh on the materials on the record and to pass a fresh order in accordance with law.
As the impugned order has been quashed, consequent thereto remaining orders dated 5189 (Annexure-18) and 1.11.89 (Annexure-20) are also quashed.
However, if the disciplinary authority comes to a conclusion that in the facts and circumstances of the case of fresh departmental proceeding is necessary he may proceed in accordance with law.
It is expected that the matter shall be disposed of as early as possible preferably within a period of four months from the date of production of the order.
There will be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.