MS Liberhan, J - By this Letters Patent Appeal, the State has challenged the order, dated September 1, 1988, by which Writ of Mandamus was issued directing the State to fix the pay of the writ-petitioner at Rs. 2100/- in the pay-scale of Rs. 1580-60-1700-75-2000/100-2400, that is a step higher than the one of the writ-petitioner was drawing as Assistant Advocate-General.
2.
In order to determine the question raised in this appeal, brief relevant facts are :- Balwant Rai (hereinafter referred to as the petitioner) was appointed as Additional District and Sessions Judge on October 16, 1979 in the pay-scale of Rs. 1580-60-1700/75-2000/100-2400 while he was working as Assistant Advocate-General, Punjab in the pay-scale Rs. 2000-100-2300.
The State of Punjab vide its letters dated August 26, 1987 (Copy Annexure P-6) fixed the pay of the petitioner in the time scale of Additional District and Sessions Judge at the rate of Rs. 1580/- per month in the pay scale of Rs. 1580-2400 with effect from November 21, 1979.
The fixation of pay resulted in reduction of pay of the petitioner by Rs. 420/- per month.
The High Court intimated to the Punjab State that the duties and responsibilities of the Additional District and Sessions Judge are higher than those of Assistant Advocate-General.
The petitioner claimed protection of his pay in view of Rule 44.
(c)(i) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume I, Part I, and impugned the fixation of his pay.
3.
The State of Punjab defended fixing of pay, inter alia contention that since the petitioner was holding the post of Assistant Advocate-General in a temporary capacity, and the Head of Department where he was holding the post of Assistant Advocate-General did not issue a certificate to the effect, that he would havwe contined to hold the post of Assistant Advocate-General but for his appointment as Additional District and Sessions Judge, the benefit of Rules for pay protection cannot be granted.
It was further urged that the rules were not applicable to the facts in the case of the petitioner.
4.
It would be expedient to refer to Rule 44(c)(i) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume I, Part I, which runs as under :  "Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules where the Government employee holding the post in a temporary or officiating capacity is promoted or appointed in a substantive, temporary or officiating capacity to another post carrying duties and responsibilities of greater importance than those attaching to the post held by him, his initial pay in the same scale of the higher post shall be fixed at the stage next above his pay drawn by him in the lower post provided it is certified by the Head of the Department in which the Government employee was holding the lower post that he would have continued to officiate in the lower post but for his promotion/appointment to the higher post."
5.
The learned Single Judge came to the conclusion that in spite of the certificate having not been issued by the Head of the Department to the effect that had he not been appointed as Additional District and Sessions Judge he would have continued holding the post of Assistant Advocate-General still in view of the undisputed facts that emerged from the pleadings of the parties and the question posed in the course of arguments it had emerged that the post of the Assistant Advocate-General which the petitioner was holding had continued and he would have continued on the said post but for this appointment as Additional District and Sessions Judge.
After referring to Rule 13(2) of the Punjab Superior Judicial Service Rules, 1963, the learned Single Judge observed that the Rule was applicable not to the petitioner but the same was applicable only in case of new appointees to Superior Judicial Service from the Bar, wherein the length of practice as an Advocate is to be taken into account for fixing the pay.
The learned Single Judge after dilating on the words "duties and responsibilities" found that the duties and responsibilities of the Additional District and Sessions Judge are of greater importance, as compared to those of Assistant Advocate-General and hence the pay of the petitioner had to be protected.
6.
The learned Additional Advocate-General appearing for the State of Punjab assailed the judgment of the learned Single Judge and urged with some emphasis that the respondent was appointed as Additional District and Sessions Judge on the basis of his being an Advocate.
Therefore, it is Rule 13(2) of the Punjab Superior Judicial Services Rules, 1963 (hereinafter referred to as the 1963 Rule) which would be applicable to the case of the respondent.
It was submitted that he accepted the new post as a fresh appointment, and he was not selected because of his holding the post of Assistant Advocate-General.
7.
The learned Additional Advocate-General contended that the conditions imposed for protection of pay under Rule 44 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules are missing.
The High Court cannot substitute a certificate required to be issued by the Head of the Department, i.e. Advocate-General, to the effect that but for his appointment as Additional District and Sessions Judge, he would have continued to hold the post of Assistant Advocate-General, nor it could be said that he was appointed to a post carrying duties and responsibilities of greater importance than those attached to the post held by him.
8.
The learned counsel for the respondent refuted the submissions made by the counsel for the appellant and submitted that Rule 13(2) of the Punjab Superior Judicial Service Rules, 1963 shall not be attracted to the case of the respondent inasmuch as the respondent had joined the Superior Judicial Service from the post of Assistant Advocate-General to the post of Additional District and Sessions Judge.
Rule 13 of the 1963 Rules provided for the fixation of pay of the direct recruits who had joined as Additional District and Sessions Judge under the State for the first time.
There is no rule under 1963 Rules which provides the methodology of fixing the pay of a person joining the post of Additional District and Sessions Judge as a direct recruit from amongst the persons who were already in the Government Service.
In that eventuality, Rule 44.
(c)(i) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume I, Part I, squarely covers the case of the respondent.
9.
As a general rule, the Administration is expected to act fairly and what is fair, depends upon the peculiar circumstances of good administration that the Administration should act fairly and eliminate unfair treatment to the extent the circumstances in a particular case allow (within the provisions framed by the Legistrature) and further protect the same right or interest given to its employees; and further safeguard the legitimate expectations.
The Administration has not to allow the words to become tyrannical masters.
They have to be just and reasonable.
The attempt should be to do justice and not to perpetuate injustice.
It is the balancing between in the interest of the individual and that of the State which has to be kept in view.
The draconian approach cannot be allowed to be adopted.
The essential facts and realities of life have to be kept in view.
The hard realities of life of an ordinary prudent person with normal expectation are to be judged.
They cannot be left to the capricious whims of the authority to decide one way or the other.
The rule has to be interpreted liberally and fairly, and not in an oppressive manner so as to deny the normal expectation of a person in service and nature of status acquired by public servant which goes with the post.
It would not be beyond the normal human expectation of a person when appointed to a post with higher responsibility would expect more pay than what he was drawing earlier in the lower post.
The Government servant acquires a status governed by a statute and statutory rules.
In this view of the matter, there cannot be two opinions, nor any serious attempt has been made at the bar to say so, that the post of Additional District and Sessions Judge is not more onerous and does not carry higher responsibilities and duties as compared to the post of Assistant Advocate-General, though there are functional dissimilarities between the two posts.
There cannot be any dispute that attempt should be made to attract talent to join the Judiciary whose independence is one of the constitutional considerations and a strong pillar for democracy to survive.
Denial of the protection of pay to a Government servant who, though otherwise eligible for the post with higher responsibilities and duties, may, for economic considerations dissuade him from opting for it.
Thus, the Institution as such may be the loser.
Grant of protection of the pay which an Officer was drawing before joining the cadre will foster his contentment and happiness which would not only go a long way in efficient service but is also very vital for proper discharge of the duties entrusted to him.
10.
In our considered view, providing for eligibility conditions for a post has no nexus with the rules and regulations for fixing the pay of a person.
There can be no gainsaying that Rule 13(2) of the Punjab Superior Judicial Service Rules, 1963 provides for fixation of the pay of the members of Service who are admittedly the direct recruits from the bar and were not previously in the service of the State.
There is no rule under the 1963 Rules, nor the learned Additional Advocate-General has been able to point out anything to show that the pay of a member of service like Assistant Advocate-General on joining the Superior Judicial Service as Additional District and Sessions Judge is to be fixed like direct recruits, though for his eligibility the condition of being an Advocate or a member of the bar for a particular number of years might have been applied to find out his figment for the cadre post.
Rule 21 of the Punjab Superior Judicial Rules, 1963 provides that in case of there being no-express rule, the members of the Service shall be governed by such general rules as the authority competent under Article 309 of the Constitution of India, might have framed or would frame from time to time.
In this situation, the respondent shall be squarely governed by Rule 44(c)(i) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume I, Part I.
11.
In our view, there is no force in the submission made by the learned Additional Advocate-General that the essential concomitants enjoined by Rule 44.
(c)(i) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume I, Part I, to be complied with are missing in the case of the respondent.
We fully subscribe to the view taken by the learned Single Judge that if a right is conferred on a person, he cannot be left high and dry or to the whims of the State or without a remedy to enforce his rights.
Mere non-issuing of a certificate by the Advocate-General, the Head of the Department, would not undo the right conferred on the respondent with regard to protection of his pay.
As has been observed earlier, as well as by the learned Single Judge the post, against which the respondent had been working as Assistant Advocate-General has continued till date and but for his appointment to the post of Additional District and Sessions Judge, he would have continued on that post.
Rule 4.5 does not make any distinction between the government employee holding the post in a temporary or officiating capacity or his appointment being in a substantive, temporary or officiating capacity.
What the rule requires is that a person must be holding a post under the Government at the time of his appointment and the new appointment must be to a post with higher responsibilities and duties than the post held by him earlier.
The avowed object of the rule is the protection of pay so that a Government employee willingly and happily accepts a post of higher responsibilities and duties.
As already observed, we need not dilate on the duties of Additional District and Sessions Judge which are beyond any doubt of higher responsibility.
In view of the facts stated above, the post being available, the respondent would have continued in the post had he not been appointed as Additional District and Sessions Judge.
The above observation of ours find support from the view taken in Ramesh Kumar Mishra v. State of M.P. and others, 1979(3) S.L.R.
232 as well as P Daniel and others v. The Chairman, Central Board Direct Taxes, New Delhi and others, 1988(7) S.L.R.
658.
12.
Taking the view what is fair in the circumstances as stated above, we find no force in the appeal.
The same is dismissed, with no order as to costs.
13.
The Department is directed to fix the pay of the respondent in terms of Rule 44.
(c)(i) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume I, Part I, by protecting the pay he was drawing as Assistant Advocate-General at the relevant time to his appointment to the Superior Judicial Service.
Appeal dismissed.