AL Bahri, J - Vide this order two Civil Revisions are being disposed of, one filed by the Guru Nanak Dev University, the defendant and the other Civil Revision No. 2700 of 1990 filed by Ramesh Katarya, the plaintiff, as they have arisen out of the same order passed by the Additional District Judge, Amritsar dated September 14, 1990.
2.
Ramesh Katarya passed Matriculation examination from Punjab School Education Board in the year 1976.
He in 1988 passed Parbhakar examinations and in 1989 he passed BA Part II and III examinations in English only from the Punjab University in April and September respectively.
He also passed an additional subject of Philosophy of BA Examination of the Panjab University.
Thus, he obtained certificate of Bachelor of Arts from the Panjab University.
He applied for taking Competitive Entrance Examination for admission to LL.B.
Course of 1990 to be started by the Guru Nanak University.
He was issued Roll Number by the University on the basis of the academic qualification.
However, subsequently the Roll Number was cancelled before the start of the examination.
This led Ramesh Katarya, plaintiff to file a civil suit challenging the action of the University.
He also prayed in the suit for interim relief of allowing him to take the examination aforesaid.
Subordinate Judge 1st Class, Amritsar, dismissed the application filed under Order 39 Rules 1 and 2 read with Section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure, holding that prima facie the plaintiff had no merit in the suit as Guru Nanak Dev University had decided before issuing the prospectusfor the Course aforesaid not to recognize the BA Degree issued by the Panjab University in the case of persons who had passed vernacular subjects, such as Parbhakar with Matriculation and English only in BA Parts II and III with additional subject from the Panjab University.
The plaintiff Ramesh Katarya aggrieved by the aforesaid order dated July 28, 1990 passed by the Subordinate Judge, preferred an appeal, which was allowed by the Lower Appellate Court on September 14, 1990.
A direction was given to the University to consider the case of Ramesh Katarya for the purposes of this in the Competitive Entrance Examination for Law classes for 1990-91.
Ramesh Katarya, plaintiff, in his Revision Petition claimed a further relief that he should be permitted to join the classes.
In other words, he should be allowed the admission which should be subject to a final decision in the suit; whereas the claim of the University in the Revision Petition is that there is no prima facie case in favour of the plaintiff to be admitted to the Course, as the University had taken a decision much before the issuance of the prospectus not to recognize such a Degree of the Panjab University.
3.
Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, was established under the Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar Act, 1969 (hereinafter referred to as the Act).
Under Section 4 of the Act one of the powers and duties of the University is to hold examinations and to confer degrees.
Section 12 prescribes different Authorities who are functioning in the University.
They are as follows :-  (i) the Senate, (ii) the Syndicate, (iii) the Academic Council,  (iv) the Faculties, (v) the Board of Studies, (vi) such other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to be the authorities of the University.
The Senate is constituted under Section 13 of the Act.
The Syndicate is constituted under Section 14.
It is the Principal Executive Body of the University.
The Academic Council is constituted under Section 15 of the Act.
It reads as under :- Section 15.
The Academic Council shall be the academic body of the University and shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, have the control and general regulation and be responsible for the maintenance of standards of instruction, education and examination within the University, and shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be conferred or imposed upon it by the Statutes.
It shall have the right to advise the Syndicate on all academic matters.
Section 19 provides for the first Statute of the University to be made by the State Government and thereafter as provided under sub-section (2) of Section 19, the Syndicate is to make new or additional Statutes or to amend or repeal the Statutes.
Section 20 provides for making Ordinance on different subjects mentioned therein, which includes the conduct of examinations, admission of students, courses of studies, degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions to be awarded etc.
These Ordinance can be made, amended, repealed or added to by the Syndicate.
If such an Ordinance affects the admission or enrollment of students or prescribing examinations to be recognized as equivalent to the University examinations or affecting the conditions, mode of appointment or duties of examiners or the conduct or standard of examinations or any course of study, no Ordinance is to be made unless a draft of such Ordinance has been proposed by the Academic Council, as provided in Sub-section (1) of Section 21 of the Act.
Under sub-section (2) of Section 21, the Syndicate has been given the power to amend any draft Ordinance proposed by the Academic Council or to return it to the aforesaid Council for reconsideration.
The Syndicate has also been given the owner to reject the proposal or subsequent suggestion.
4.
Now, a stage is set to consider the facts of the cse in hand and the argument addressed.
The ordinance dealing with Degree of Bachelor of Laws Examination is contained in the University Calender Volume II 1986 Edition.
Ordinance 16(A)(i) and (ii) for admission to First Semester Examination in Law provides as under :-  16(A) The Examination shall be open to any person : (i) who is a graduate in any Faculty of his University or any other recognised University having obtained not less than 40 per cent marks in the aggregate.
In case, the candidate has obtained the BA degree through the Modern Indian Language/Oriental Classical Language and English only examinations, the 40 per cent marks prescribed above shall be computed by taking into account the marks obtained by him in English, the one elective subject and the additional optional subject, and 70 out of 200 marks for the Hons.
Examinations in the Modern Indian Language (Gyani/Prabhakar/Adib Fazil), or the Oriental classical language (Shastri/Munshi Fazil/Maulvi Fazil) or (ii) who holds a post-graduate degree in any Faculty from this University or any other examination recognized by this University as equivalent thereto :  5.
Prospectus for the Course of 1990 for admission to First Semester Examination in Law was issued, the eligibility clause provides as under :-  Eligibility : Any person who is holding Bachelor's Degree in any Faculty of this University or equivalent thereto, from any other recognised University, with not less than 45% marks in aggregate or who holds post-graduate degree from this University or any other recognised University will be eligible to appear in the Test.
In case, the candidate has obtained BA Degree through Modern Indian Languages, Oriental Classical Languages and English only Examination, the 45% marks, as prescribed above, shall be computed by taking into account the marks obtained by him/her in English, the one elective subject and the additional optional subject and 70 out of 200 marks for the Honours examination in Modern Indian Languages (Gyani Prabhakar/Abid Fazil) or Oriental Classical Languages (Shastri/Fazil/Maulvi Fazil)."
The emphasis is applied to the words or "equivalent thereto in" the eligibility clause reproduced above which do not find mention in Ordinance 16 above.
During arguments, Sh. PS Patwalia, Advocate, produced copy of the proceedings of the meeting of the Equivalence Committee held on August 9, 1989 which was approved by the Academic Council in its meeting held on January 16, 1990.
Item No. 5 of the proceedings of the meeting of the Equivalence Committee reads as under :- Item No. 5 :  The Committee considered office note regarding recognition of BA Degree awarded by Panjab University, Chandigarh (awarded after two years duration after Matric/Hr.
Sec.) as equivalent to the corresponding degree of the University.
RESOLVED : That BA Degree awarded by Panjab University, Chandigarh under Ordinance 22 i.e. passing of BA Part II and III examination directly after passing Gyani/Prabhakar examination after Matric/Higher Secondary/+2 examination and without passing BA Part I examination from the admission of 1989 be not recognised as equivalent to the BA Degree of this University."
The contention of Sh. PS Patwalia, Advocate for the Guru Nanak Dev University is that the decision of the Academic Council dated January 16, 1990 approving the decision of the Equivalence Committee taken in the meeting held on August 9, 1989, as reproduced above, was much prior to the issuing of the prospectus and that being the position, Ramesh Katarya, the plaintiff, was not eligible to take the Entrance Examination, in other words to seek admission to the First Semester Examination in law of the University.
The plaintiff had passed Matriculation Examination and thereafter done Prabhakar from the Panjab University.
Subsequently, he also passed BA Part II and III examination in English subject only and had also passed in one additional subject and conferred a degree of BA by the Panjab University.
Since such a degree was not to be treated as equivalent to Bachelor's Degree of the Guru Nanak Dev University, as per decision aforesaid, the plaintiff was not entitled to seek admission in the course.
The University was thus within its rights to cancel the Roll Number issued to the plaintiff.
Sh. Patwalia distinguished the authorities relied upon by the plaintiff before the Lower Appellate Court on merits.
I find no merit in the contention urged on behalf of the University by Sh. Patwalia.
What has been shown during arguments on behalf of the University is that some decision by the Equivalence Committee was taken under item No. 5 as referred to above not to recognize the degree of the Panjab University conferred on passing of certain examination and that decision was approved by the Academic Council on January 26, 1990 as urged.
However, Sh. Patwalia has not been able to produce any copy of the decision of the Syndicate accepting the recommendation of the Academic Council so that Ordinance 16, as reproduced above could be stated to have been amended.
Since the Ordinance was not amended by the Syndicate, the admission to the Law Faculty of the University was to be strictly in accordance with the exiting Ordnance.
It is not urged or dispute on behalf of Guru Nanak Dev University that Panjab University is not a recognised University.
What was sought to be urged was that some examination conducted by the Panjab University or a degree conferred by the Panjab University in certain circumstances was not made equivalent to the Graduate degree conferred by the Faculty of Guru Nanak Dev University.
Ordinance 16, as reproduced above, does not contemplate of recognition of the Graduate degree of the other University.
Sub-clause (ii) of Ordinance 16 only prescribes recognition by the University of other post-graduate degree as equivalent.
Present is not a case of recognition by the University of the other post-graduate degree and, therefore, sub-clause (ii) will not be attracted.
When Ordinance 16, as it stands, prima facie allowed admission to the law course to Graduates in any Faculty of Guru Nanak Dev University or any other recognised University, the plaintiff Ramesh Katarya who is a Graduate of another recognised University ie Panjab University, was eligible to take the Competitive Entrance Examination, as such, subject to the number of marks obtained.
The action of the University after issuing the Roll Number to the plaintiff to cancel it on the basis of a proposal of Academic Council not to recognise the Graduate Degree issued by the Panjab University in certain circumstances as reproduced above without amendment of the Ordinance and thus contrary to the aforesaid Ordinance 16 is illegal.
Ramesh Katarya, the plaintiff, thus had a prima facie case to obtain interim relief in the suit.
6.
On behalf of the plaintiff Ramesh Katarya learned counsel relied upon the decision of the J and K High Court in Rajkumar Pandita v. State of J and K and ors., AIR 1989 J and K 37.
That was a case of admission to Post Graduate Medical Course.
The criteria for admission was changed after issuance of advertisement.
It was observed that after issuance of the advertisement such a criteria could not be changed.
In case of alteration in criteria in selection after issuance of such notice it was incumbent upon the authorities to issue fresh advertisement of notice in terms of such criteria.
The decision aforesaid is not helpful in deciding the present case as the University has failed to show that Ordinance 16 was ever amended by the Syndicate and mere recommendation of the Academic Council was not enough.
The decision of the Supreme Court in Deepak Sibal v. Panjab University and another, AIR 1989 SC 903 is again not applicable to the case in hand.
That was a case of discrimination between different employees, who were seeking admission in the Law Course.
The Rule was changed restricting admission to some of the Government or Semi-Government employees which was held to be discriminatory.
In Shri Krishan v. The Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra, AIR 1976 SC 376, the University having allowed the candidate to appear in the examination withdrew the candidature.
The candidate was allowed to continue the studies as the fault lay with the Head of Department (Principal of the College) and the Dean of the University, who did not scrutinize admission form properly and permitted to take the examination.
On merits in the present case Ramesh Katarya was not permitted to take the examination and strictly the ratio of this decision may not be applicable.
However, as already observed above, Ramesh Katarya was eligible to take examination under Ordinance 16 as reproduced above as framed by the University.
Merely on a decision taken by the Academic Council not to recognize a particular degree issued by the Panjab University, the Ordinance aforesaid did not stand as amended.
In the eligibility clause provided in the prospectus, the addition of the words "or equivalent thereto" which goes with the Bachelor's Degree of any faculty of the Guru Nanak Dev University was clearly in contravention of the Ordinance 16 as reproduced above which provides eligibility to Graduates of any Faculty of Guru Nanak Dev University or any other recognized University.
At this stage it may be pointed out that recognition of Universities is different from recognition of different degrees issued by the Universities as discussed above.
7.
Sh. PS Patwalia, Advocate, for the University argued that a person with Matriculation Examination Certificate having passed Prabhakar degree by the Guru Nanak Dev University, if he had also passed in English subject of BA Part I, II and III with one additional subject of the Guru Nanak Dev University could join the Course.
Since the Panjab University had issued Bachelor's Degree to such a person who has passed BA Parts II and III Examination in English only having passed in additional subject after passing Parbhakar such a degree could not be treated as equivalent to Graduate Degree of the Guru Nanak Dev University.
This contention cannot be accepted in view of the analytical interpretation of Ordinance 16 referred to above.
The emphasis therein is on the Graduate Degree issued by the other recognized Universities and not a degree issued by the other University as recognized by the Guru Nanak Dev University as equivalent to its own Graduate Degree.
8.
A further question for discussion at this stage is as to what type of interim relief can be allowed to Ramesh Katarya, the plaintiff, so that his interest is safeguard and he is not made to suffer ultimately, if he succeeds in the suit.
Since in the competitive examination Ramesh Katarya was not permitted to participate his position on merit drawn after the examination cannot be known as is argued there is a waiting list of the candidates, who had taken competitive entrance examination and there is no seat available wherein the plaintiff could be accommodated.
There is force in the contention of Sh. Patwalia that without taking the examination and competing with other candidates Ramesh Katarya, plaintiff, cannot be allowed admission, may be that after taking the examination he may not come on merit.
In such circumstances, the direction given by the Lower Appellate Court to the extent that Ramesh Katarya plaintiff be permitted to take Entrance Examination was perfectly right.
He was illegally debarred from taking the Entrance Examination.
The University will hold a test for Ramesh Katarya and to declare his result in order to see his merit vis-a-vis the other candidates who had competed the Entrance Examination and then to allow him admission to the Law Course on merit.
As this process is going to take some time as fresh examination is to be held, Ramesh Katarya, plaintiff, should not be allowed to suffer and as interim relief he should be permitted to attend the classes forthwith without formal admission subject to payment of tuition fee and if on merit, after his examination, he is to be admitted to the regular course, admission fee and other charges would be payable by him and if need be an additional seat would be created for him.
9.
With the aforesaid directions an interim order on application filed under Order 39 Rules 1 and 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure which would be enforced during the pendency of the suit, the Revision Petition filed by the University is dismissed and the Revision petition of Ramesh Katarya is allowed as indicated above.
Ramesh Katarya will be allowed costs in one set which are quantified at Rs. 1000/- in his Revision.
Revision dismissed.