Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J -The petitioner is questioning termination of his service by the Calcutta Tramways Company (1978) Limited in which he was working as "khalasy".
He took out the writ petition when a letter dated February 15, 2005 written by the company was received by him.
In that the managing director of the company stated that having regard to the past developments, there was no scope to re-engage him in the company unles.
there was any specific direction or order from appropriate Court or tribunal or authority.
2.
His case is this.
During the period from May 16, 1994 to May 30, 1994 he could not attend office, since he was ill.
He joined duty on May 31, 1994 and suddenly on June 1, 1994 he was directed to go out.
From then the company did not permit him to join duty, though he submitted numerous applications and appeals.
The authorities told him that because of order of the chairman-cum- managing director dated November 30, 1994 (Annexure P-7) there was no scope to permit him to work in the company.
3.
Case of the company is this.
The petitioner was a habitual absentee; since he remained unauthorizedly absent for a long time, by order dated June 1, 1994 the general manager of the company discharged him from service, according to rules and regulations of the company.
Feeling aggrieved, he preferred an appeal which was dismissed by the chairman-cum-managing director by his order dated November 30, 1994.
That order was received by the petitioner on December 5, 1994.
Even thereafter he continued to make representations.
The representations were considered and replies were sent.
4.
Further case of the company is this.
By letter dated April 25, 1996 the personnel officer (admn.)
informed him that after rejection of his appeal by the chairman-cum-managing director there was no scope to engage him in the company.
Similar replies were given whenever he made representations seeking re-engagement.
The letter dated February 15, 2005 relied on by the petitioner was one of them.
He suppressed the fact that before taking out the writ petition, he had approached the conciliation officer in terms of provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, and that proceedings were pending before that officer.
5.
Counsel argues that the discharge order dated June 1, 1994 was never served on the petitioner.
On the strength of the apex Court decision in Deokinandan Prasad v. The State of Bihar and ors., AIR 1971 SC 1409, he argues that initial defect in the order of discharge issued by the general manager could not have been cured by the appellate authority who dismissed his appeal by the order dated November 30, 1994.
He relies on a judgment dated May 19, 2003 given by Bhaskar Bhattacharya, J in W.P. No. 5376(W) of 2003 (Sri Sushil Chandra Das v. State of West Bengal & Ors.,) and argues that a similar discharge order issued by the same company was set aside in that case on the ground that the order of discharge had been issued without giving opportunity of hearing to the petitioner concerned.
6.
This writ petition was taken out on September 9, 2005.
It was taken out basing the cause of action on the letter dated February 15, 2005 issued by the managing director of the company.
I have no hesitation in saying that the writ petition is liable to be dismissed on the ground of delay alone.
The order discharging the petitioner was issued as back as June 1, 1994.
I do not find any reason to accept the contention that order was never served on the petitioner.
He preferred an appeal, copy where of has not been produced before this Court.
7.
Counsel says that no formal appeal was filed, and that only representations were submitted from time to time.
In the face of the order of the chairman-cum-managing director dated November 30, 1994, I am unable to give any credence to the case of the petitioner.
That authority gave his decision in the appeal filed by the petitioner against order of the general manager (admn.)
dated June 1, 1994.
The petitioner has annexed a document describing that it was the order of the appellate authority dated November 30, 1994.
In the opposition the company has categorically stated that the document annexed (it is at page 31) is a forged and fabricated document.
8.
It has stated that the order made by the appellate authority was the one annexed to the opposition.
To the allegation, the petitioner has said in reply that the order at page 31 of the writ petition had actually been sent to him in an envelope, and that he was asked to give a receipt on a blank white sheet.
Such absurd case of the petitioner, in my view, should be rejected outright.
This is more so for the reason that he approached the writ Court after around eleven years from the date of his discharge from service.
At no point of time, before filing his reply to the opposition, he alleged that he was made to put his signature showing receipt of the order dated November 30, 1994 on a blank white sheet of paper.
9.
It seems to me that the petitioner made reckless allegation against the authorities of the company.
His appeal was rejected on merit as back as November 30, 1994.
He never chose to question that order till before taking out this writ petition.
He also suppressed the fact that he had approached the conciliation officer in terms of provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
The letter dated February 15, 2005 had nothing to do for the purpose of entitling him to approach the writ Court challenging the order of discharge dated June 1, 1994, and the order of the appellate authority dated November 30, 1994.
10.
On the facts of the case, I do not see how the authorities given to me are of any assistance.
Here the question before the appellate authority was not of curing any defect in the order of the general manager.
No contention was raised regarding any defects.
The single bench decision of this Court was given on the facts of that case where the discharge order was questioned by the person concerned with utmost expedition.
The case here is absolutely opposite; here the petitioner sought to question the order of discharge after eleven years.
He is not entitled to any relief whatsoever from the writ Court, essentially a Court of equity.
11.
For these reasons the writ petition is dismissed.
There shall be no order for costs in it.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order shall be supplied to the parties, if applied for, within three days from the date of receipt of the file by the Section concerned.
Petition dismissed.