Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The writ petitioner in WPCT No. 164 of 2005 has taken out this application dated January 04, 2006 seeking review of judgment dated November 25, 2005 dismissing the writ petition.
2.
Advocate for the petitioner says that three points argued by the petitioner appearing in person at the time of hearing of the writ petition were not considered by their Lordships.
The points are: (i) without publishing a fresh advertisement, though in terms of previous division bench order dated July 15, 2002 that was required, the authorities proceeded to conclude the selection process; (ii) at the relevant date the sixth respondent in the writ petition was not eligible to be considered for the post in question; (iii) the contention that the selection was vitiated by arbitrariness was not considered by their Lordships.
He says that moreover two documents have now come to the possession and custody of the petitioner, and that if they are taken into consideration, then there is a possibility of the petitioner's success in the already dismissed writ petition.
3.
In 1997 an advertisement was published by the union public service commission inviting applications for the post of principal; in Jawaharlal Nehru Rajkeeya Mahavidhyalaya, a government college.
The petitioner, the sixth respondent, and one Dr. ZA Khan applied for the post with other candidates.
The eligible candidates (including the sixth respondent) were interviewed by the selection committee in 1998.
The sixth respondent was selected; he was accordingly appointed.
4.
Questioning the selection that Dr. Khan approached the central administrative tribunal.
His application was dismissed by the tribunal by order dated January 24, 2002.
Feeling aggrieved, he moved this court by filing WPCT No. 26 of 2002.
By judgment and order dated July 15, 2002 that writ petition was allowed, and the selection and appointment of the sixth respondent were quashed.
The division bench directed the authorities to hold a fresh selection for filling the post in question.
5.
Feeling aggrieved by the order of the division bench dated July 15, 2002 two petitions for special leave to appeal were moved before the apex court, and they were dismissed.
Thereafter the authorities including the commission took necessary steps to conclude the selection process.
At such stage expressing apprehension that ineligible person might be invited for interview, that Dr. Khan filed a contempt application before this court.
6.
By order dated November 5, 2003 that application was disposed of holding that there was no reason to proceed in contempt.
Their Lordships, however, observed that interest of all concerned would be duly satisfied if the selection process was completed by interviewing the candidates who were eligible at the date the order was made by the division bench allowing the writ petition filed by Dr. Khan.
Their Lordships gave liberty to Dr. Khan to approach the appropriate forum for ventilating his grievances.
7.
The process once again ended in the selection of the sixth respondent.
The petitioner challenged the selection before the central administrative tribunal.
By order dated September 16, 2005 the tribunal dismissed his original application.
Feeling aggrieved, he took out the writ petition which was dismissed by the judgment and order dated November 25, 2005.
Seeking review of the judgment and order the present application for review has been taken out.
8.
Regarding the contention that though in terms of the division bench judgement and order dated July 15, 2002 a fresh advertisement was to be published by the authority concerned, no such advertisement was published, advocate for the petitioner says that the contention was raised before their Lordships, but their Lordships did not decide it by giving a correct interpretation to the order of the division bench dated November 5, 2003 made in the contempt proceedings initiated by Dr. Khan.
9.
Advocate points out that liberty was given by the division bench to Dr. Khan (and also to the petitioner in his contempt application) to agitate all the questions before the tribunal.
He says that the contention was raised before the tribunal and the tribunal gave a wrong decision.
His argument is that by giving an unacceptable interpretation to the division bench order dated November 5, 2003 their Lordships did not decide the contention on merits.
10.
In our view, we cannot decide, in exercise of powers of review, whether their Lordships deciding the writ petition finally gave a correct interpretation to the division-bench order dated November 5, 2003.
It is apparent on the face of the judgement and that the contention received their Lordships' consideration.
Even if the interpretation given by their Lordships is wrong, in our view, we cannot examine the contention once again by entertaining an application for review.
The wrong interpretation, if any, could be corrected only by the apex court.
Hence we are of the view that the contention regarding requirement of a fresh advertisement cannot be a ground to admit the review application.
11.
Regarding the eligibility of the sixth respondent, advocate for the petitioner argues that though a specific contention was raised that at the date the division bench allowed the writ petition filed by Dr. Khan (it was July 15, 2002) the sixth respondent, having crossed the maximum age, was not eligible to be considered for the post, their Lordships did not consider it properly.
According to him the question of granting benefit of age relaxation to the sixth respondent was extraneous to the contention raised, and it was to be decided keeping in view the clarifications given by the division bench by order dated November 5, 2003 in the contempt proceedings initiated by Dr. Khan.
12.
We find that the contention regarding eligibility of the sixth respondent that he had allegedly crossed the maximum age at the relevant date, was closely examined by their Lordships.
It cannot be said that contention was not considered.
May be that their Lordships came to a conclusion that according to the petitioner is not correct.
But, in our view, that is no ground to permit petitioner to seek in view of the judgment and order given by their Lordships.
13.
Besides, we do not find anything from the judgment and order dated July 15, 2002 given in the writ petition filed by Dr. Khan that the authorities were to conclude the selection process by considering the candidatures of only those candidates who were eligible at the date that writ petition was disposed of.
Such a clarification was given by another division bench while considering a connected contempt application.
14.
It is known that in contempt proceedings original order made in original proceedings cannot be clarified or varied.
Be that as it may, we do not think we need to make any comments regarding the binding effect of the observations made in the order dated November 5,2003.
On the facts of the case, we find no reason to permit the petitioner to re-agitate the question of eligibility of the sixth respondent by filing a review application.
15.
As to the question of arbitrariness vitiating the selection process, we must say that it will be dangerous to entertain such a contention at this stage.
Advocate for the petitioner says that though the point was argued before their Lordships, it was not decided one way or the other.
16.
From the judgment whose review is sought, we find that their Lordships specifically mentioned the points argued by the petitioner appearing in person in the case.
We do not find that any point was taken that the selection process was vitiated by arbitrariness.
It is known that parties and courts are to go by the contents of the records of the court.
There is no compelling reason to permit the petitioner to say something which is not borne out by the records.
The facts and circumstances stated in the order, made by the court are to be treated as sacrosanct.
17.
In any case, on the facts of the case, we do not find any reason to say that the selection process was vitiated by any arbitrariness on the part of the authorities concerned.
The first selection having been quashed by this court by making order in the writ petition filed by Dr. Khan, the authorities were under the obligation to hold a fresh selection, and thus to draw a conclusion to the selection process that had been initiated in the year 1997.
18.
In midway, both Dr. Khan and the petitioner initiated contempt proceedings making various allegations, including the allegation that the authorities were not following the directions given the judgement and order dated July 15, 2002.
Though no substance was found to proceed in contempt, the persons initiating the contempt proceedings were given liberty to ventilate their grievances before the appropriate forum.
There is absolutely no material from which even a prima facie opinion can be formed that the selection in question was vitiated by any arbitrariness.
19.
The last ground on which advocate for the petitioner seeks review of the judgment, is that two letters: one written by Dr. Khan to the commission and the other written by the commission, have now come into the possession and custody of the petitioner, and from them it is apparent that though the commission was in favour of publishing a fresh advertisement inviting applications, the administration did not agree to the adoption of such a course.
20.
We do not see how these two letters, if taken into consideration, are going to change the final decision already given in the petitioners' writ petition.
The contention that a fresh advertisement was required was rejected.
None of the two letters can lead to a reversal of the decision.
Hence we do not find any reason to permit a review of the judgment on the basis of those letters.
21.
In support of his arguments advocate for the petitioner has given the following apex court decisions: (i) Shankar K Mandal and others v. State of Bihar and others, reported at 2003 SOL Case No. 174; (ii) Board of Control for Cricket, India and another v. Netaji Cricket Club and others, reported at AIR 2005 SC 592; (iii) Indian Charge Chrome Ltd and another v. Union of India and others, reported at 2005(3) Supreme 460.
22.
There is no dispute regarding the propositions of law explained by their Lordships in the above-noted authorities.
It is also known that unless a point is argued before the forum that makes an order, such point cannot be agitated before the appellate forum.
There is also no dispute regarding the proposition that in fit and proper case power of review has to be exercised for correcting a manifest mistake of fact or law.
In our view, in the present case the authorities cited to us cannot improve the situation.
23.
We shall be failing in our duty, if we do not mention that advocate for the petitioner prayed for leave to file a supplementary affidavit.
He said that by the supplementary affidavit he wanted to produce the copies of the writ petition and some other documents.
24.
We declined to grant leave to file supplementary affidavit, since the procedure is not convenient for disposal of an original application like a review application.
We, however, gave liberty to amend the review application or to withdraw it with liberty to file a fresh one.
25.
Advocate then wanted us to make an order directing the supplementary affidavit to be kept with the records.
We do not find any reason to make such an order, since we decided not to grant him any leave to file any supplementary affidavit.
26.
For these reasons we hold that there is no merit in the review application.
We accordingly dismiss it.
There shall be no order for costs in it.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order, if applied for, shall be given to advocates for the parties on usual undertaking.
Petition dismissed.