Sunil Ambwani, J - Heard Sri BB Paul learned counsel for the petitioner, Sri Amit Sthelkar for the District Judge, Aligarh and learned Standing Counsel for the respondents 1 & 3.
2.
By this writ petition, the petitioner has prayed for a direction to quash the order dated 29.1.2003 passed by the Special Secretary, Government of UP, in pursuance of directions issued by this Court on 1542002 in writ petition No. 1254 of 2000 for deciding the petitioner's application for condonation of delay with representation for compassionate appointment.
3.
The compassionate appointment to the dependants for the deceased Government servant dying in harness is provided in the State under UP Recruitment of the Dependants of Government Servants Dying in Harness Rules, 1974.
Rule 5(i) of these Rules were amended by notification dated 13101973 providing that if the State Government is satisfied that denial of compassionate appointment under Dying in Harness Rules due to any delay in moving the application would cause the due hardship, the same may be considered in relaxation to the Rules of limitation in order to do complete justice.
The proviso to Rule 5(1) is quoted as below:  "5.
Recruitment of a member of the family of the deceased.
- (1) In case a Government servant dies in harness after the commencement of these rules and the spouse of the deceased Government servant is not already employed under the Central Government or a State Government, one member of his family who is not already employed under the Central Government or a Statement shall, on making an application for the purposes, be given a suitable employment in Government service on a post except the post which is within the purview of the Uttar Pradesh Public Service Commission, in relaxation of the normal recruitment rules if such person-  (i) fulfils the educational qualifications prescribed for the post  (ii) is otherwise qualified for Government service, and  (iii) makes the application employment within five years from the date of death of the Government servant;  Provided that where the State Government is satisfied that for making the application for employment causes undue hardship in any particular case, it may dispense with or relax the requirement as it may consider necessary for dealing with the case in a just and equitable manner. "
4.
Late Smt. Kusum Rani Pathak was employed in Civil Court, Aligarh.
She died in harness on 11.4.1990.
At that time the petitioner was minor.
He made an application for compassionate appointment on 271998 after he became major.
This application was forwarded to the State Government which by its order dated 14.12.1999 took a view that since the application has been given after a period of five years, the relaxation cannot be given.
The petitioner challenged the order in writ petition 1254 of 2000 which was allowed to 1542002 on the ground that the State Government has not given due consideration, and has not considered the relevant fact and applied its mind, in rejecting the application for relaxation.
It was found that the State Government had exercised power emphatically without considering the facts of the case of the petitioner.
The application was directed to be decided afresh in accordance with law.
5.
Now by impugned order the Special Secretary, Government of UP, by its order dated 29.1.2003 had again rejected the application.
After narrating the facts in paragraph 1, order of the Court in paragraph 2 in the power for relaxation given in proviso to Rule 5(1) of the Rules of 1974, in paragraph 3, the Special Secretary, Government of UP has held with petitioner's case only in five lines, in paragraph 4.
He has found that the application has been made three years and three months after the period of five years specified for such application was over, and thus looking to the facts there is no justification to exercise the powers to relax the limit.
6.
I find substance in the submission of Sri BB Paul, learned counsel for the petitioner that once again the State Government has not applied its mind and had emphatically decided the application, the State Government has failed to carry out orders of the Court and had acted in virtual defiance and contempt.
This Court in its order dated 1542002 had observed as follows :  "When the statute grants power to a particular authority, the said power has to be exercised in an objective manner by considering relevant facts and applying the mind by the authority concerned.
The contention of the counsel for the petitioner has substance that the application of the petitioner has been mechanically rejected without considering the facts of the case of the petitioner.
The impugned order does not disclose consideration of case of the petitioner."
7.
In his representation dated 2152002 enclosing order of this Court dated 1542002, the petitioner had given reasons for making application after about eight years of the death of her mother.
In paragraph 2 of his application he has stated that he is only surviving heir and his mother as his father is pre-deceased of his mother.
His father had died on 3131982.
In paragraph 5 and 6, he stated as follows :  "5.
That having become an orphan, I m passing my life in miseries and also there is no property in my name.
My deceased mother left me alone as her legal heir.
6.
That academic qualification of the petitioner is B Com.
from Agra University, Agra.
The applicant has good knowledge and speed of Hindi and English Typing."
8.
Whenever a power is given for relaxing limitation effecting valuable rights of a person, such power must be exercised with due consideration to the relevant facts and the purpose for which the power is conferred.
9.
The compassionate appointment is a social welfare measure given to tide over immediate financial crisis faced by the family of the deceased Government servant.
In the judgment beginning from Umesh Kumar Nagpal v. State of Haryana and others, 1994(4)SCC 1328 to General Manager (B & EB) and others v. Kunti Tiwari, 2004(7) SCC 271, it has been held that this right to be conferred by any valid service Rules, Regulations or Government Orders, to tide immediate financial crisis is not a vested or heritable right or an alternative mode of employment.
The vacancies should not be held up for long and should not wait till the attainment of majority.
Where the family is survive for long or the death took place close to retirement, such appointment should not be offered.
The family circumstances, the financial means, both with assets and liabilities, must be seen before such power is given.
10.
In the State of UP the Rules of 1974 do not provide for any guidelines for relaxation of five years fixed provided under the Rule 5(1)(iii).
I find that even these five years is wholly unjustified as the object of such appointment is to meet the immediate financial crisis.
In any case since I am not concerned with this matter in this case, I shall only deal with the scope of power in the proviso to Rule 5(1) of the Rules of 1974, which is quoted as above.
11.
This proviso talks of exercise of discretion only where undue hardships were caused in particular case.
It further provides that the State Government must act in a just and equitable manner in deciding such application.
These conditions restrict the powers of the State Government, to relax the time limit only when undue hardships will be caused in any particular case.
12.
While dealing with these matters, this Court has repeatedly given directions to the State Government to formulate guidelines for exercise of this power commensurate with the directions of the Supreme Court so that every case must receive just and equitable treatment.
This power should not be exercised emphatically arbitrarily, or for any oblique purposes.
13.
In the present case, the State Government has twice rejected the application only on the ground that it was made three years and three months after the expiry of five years.
The State Government has not even applied its mind to the facts of the case and the hardships pleaded in the application.
The State Government as such has once again acted illegally and arbitrarily in rejecting the application.
14.
A Court is well aware of limitation that it should not usurp the discretion by any statutory provisions of a competent authority.
The insistence of the Government for the petitioner to condone the delay is as such misplaced.
15.
The writ petition is consequently allowed.
The impugned order dated 29.1.2003 passed by the Special Secretary, Government of UP is set aside.
The State Government is directed to decide the application afresh, after formulating the guidelines for deciding such applications within a period of one month of the communication of this order.
The petitioner is made entitled to Rs. 5,000/- as costs from the State Government.
Petition allowed.