Ranjit Singh, J - Upon being compulsorily retired, the petitioner has further been visited with a cut in his pension beside forfeiture of his gratuity amount and leave encashment due to him.
He is aggrieved against imposing of the cut in his pension and the withholding of gratuity and leave encashment amounts.
The petitioner has not challenged the punishment of compulsorily retirement imposed on him.
The facts essential to get the hang of the issues agitated in the petition may need a mention in brief.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as an Assistant Cashier-cum-Godown Keeper on 751969, and continued to work as such till 1991970.
He was given a fresh appointment w.e.f.
6.10.1970 and had joined the UCO Bank branch at Shimla in Himachal pradesh.
Thereafter, he remained in service till he was compulsorily retired on 3171997.
The petitioner thus claims that he had served the respondent-bank for over a period of 28 years.
He also pleaded that as per Rules, the benefit of 5 years' service is admissible to him for calculation of pension upon completion of 20 years of service.
He thus, claims that he has 33 years of pensionable service to his credit.
The order of compulsory retirement had been made against him on the basis of charges proved against the petitioner as alleged in a charge-sheet dated 2091993.
As per the charges the petitioner while officiating as Branch Manager, had prepared some debit voutures and thus had cheated the bank.
Detailed mention of the allegation is not required because the punishment awarded to the petitioner is not under challenge.
He, however, is aggrieved against the subsequent action in imposing the cut in his pension and forfeiture of his gratuity amount and leave encashment payable to him.
Suffice it to say that after service of the charge-sheet to the petitioner, enquiry was got conducted and the enquiry report was submitted on 10.9.1996.
Thereafter, a copy of the enquiry report was supplied to the petitioner on 1191996, and after obtaining his response, the punishment of compulsory retirement was imposed on him on 2371997.
This order has been annexed as Annexure P-3.
A perusal of the same would reveal that there was no direction to impose any cut in pension payable to the petitioner or in regard to withholding of his gratuity and leave encashment.
In fact, no order in this regard subsequent to the order of punishment of compulsory retirement was even communicated to the petitioner.
He got to know of it when he had raised some objection in regard to the fixation of his pension.
Through his letter dated 2662001, the petitioner pointed out some discrepancies in the statement of pay while working out details of his pay drawn during the last 10 months of his retirement.
Prior to this, the petitioner has also written another letter to the bank on 1431998, asking for payment of leave encashment and settlement of his gratuity.
In this letter, he had also brought out to the notice of the respondent bank that he was desperately waiting for the same, as his family was on the verge of starvation for want of funds.
This was followed by another letter dated 2421999 to the Chairman and Managing Director of UCO Bank.
In this letter, the petitioner had pointed out that he had been waiting for settlement of his gratuity and leave encashment and commencement of his pension but had not received anything.
The petitioner again pleaded that it was difficult for him to subsist and was on the verge of starvation for want of funds.
Another letter seeking settlement of his gratuity, leave encashment and other benefits due was initiated by the petitioner and this undated letter has been annexed as Annexure P-7.
It is in this background that the petitioner received a communication dated 1471999, informing him that the leave encashment is not payable to him, as order of compulsorily retirement made against him amounted to termination of his service by way of punishment.
Through this letter only the petitioner was apprised that he was not eligible to receive the gratuity as per the decision of the trustees of the Gratuity Funds.
He was also informed that the decision in the matter of his settlement of pension will be communicated to him after receipt of the orders from the competent authority.
It is apparent that in this background cut of 1/3rd in pension of the petitioner was imposed.
This fact has been pleaded in the petition but no orders have been filed with the writ petition.
It appears that no such order was communicated to the petitioner but his pension at 2/3rd of the due pension payable was released to him.
So far as, withholding of leave encashment and gratuity is concerned, the same have been done on the basis of a letter dated 1471999, which has been referred to above.
In this background, the petitioner filed this writ petition impugning the action of imposing the cut in his pension and withholding his gratuity and leave encashment.
3.
After notice of motion, written statement was filed.
The writ petition was admitted on 182005, with the direction that the same be fixed for hearing before Single Judge on 11.1.2006.
In the reply filed by the bank, the action of imposing the cut in the pension to the extent of 1/3rd and withholding of gratuity and leave encashment have been justified on the ground that the same are in accordance with UCO (Employees) Pension Regulations, 1995, (hereinafter referred to as `Pension Regulations'), Service Regulations 1979 (hereinafter referred to as `Service Regulations') and under Disciplinary and Appeal Regulations, 1976 (hereinafter referred to `Disciplinary Regulations').
The assertion of the petitioner that these orders are not legal and rather discriminatory has been denied.
Further the averment regarding violation of principle of natural justice and denial of full opportunity of hearing as alleged in the petition have also been denied.
The respondent-bank has pleaded that the Enquiry Officer as well as the Disciplinary Authority had given full opportunity to the petitioner to participate in the enquiry as well as before the Disciplinary Authority and hence the grievance of the petitioner that the impugned orders were passed in violation of principle of natural justice is wrong and misconceived.
An amended written statement was also filed wherein reference to Regulation No. 33 of Chapter 5 of Pension Regulations was made to justify the imposing of cut in the pension.
Similarly, withholding of gratuity was justified by making reference to the provisions of Gratuity Fund Rules and other Regulations contained in the Service Regulations.
During the course of hearing, copies of the Regulations relied upon by the bank were also supplied.
4.
It is submitted on behalf of the petitioner that though a cut in the pension payable to the petitioner could be imposed under Rule 33 of the Pension Regulations, yet the same is to be done by passing an order and it cannot result automatically as is being viewed by the respondents.
Similarly, it is submitted that the gratuity payable to the petitioner cannot be forfeited as he is an employee who has been retired, though compulsorily and as such it cannot be said that his services have been terminated to justify withholding of his gratuity.
On the other hand, Mr. Sanjiv Gupta, representing the respondent-Bank while relying on Pension Regulation 33 has justified the action of the bank in imposing cut in pension.
Reliance has been placed on Regulation 46 of the Service Regulations for withholding gratuity.
Similarly, Regulation 38 of the Service Regulations has been pressed into service to justify non-payment of leave encashment to the petitioner.
Let us now see whether the petitioner has been rightly denied part of pension, withholding of gratuity and leave encashment.
The finding on the these aspects is as under :-  In Re : Cut in Pension  5.
Regulation 33 makes provision for imposing cut in pension in case of Officers, compulsorily retired.
The said Regulation is reproduced below :-  "Compulsory Retirement Pension :- (1) An employee compulsorily retired from service as a penalty on or after 1st day of November, 1993 in terms of Discipline and Appeal Regulations or settlement by the authority higher than the authority competent to impose such penalty may be granted pension at a rate not less than two-thirds and not more than full pension admissible to him on the date of his compulsory retirement if otherwise he was entitled to such pension on superannuation on that date.
(2) Whenever in the case of a bank employee the Competent Authority passed an order (whether original, appellate or in exercise of power of review) awarding a pension less that the full compensation pension admissible under these regulations, the Board of Directors shall be consulted before such order is passed.
(3) A pension granted or awarded under sub-regulation (1) or, as the case may be, under sub-regulation (2), shall not be less than the amount of rupees three hundred and seventy five per mensem."
It appears that no order imposing a cut in pension of the petitioner was specifically passed and it has been taken that the operation of Regulation 33 is automatic whereby the petitioner has been held entitled and paid pension at the rate of 2/3rd of the full pension admissible to him on the date of compulsory retirement.
During the course of arguments, counsel appearing for respondents was pointedly asked if any order was made imposing a cut in pension and whether any notice was issued to the petitioner before denying him 1/3rd of his pension.
Instead of answering the query, the counsel submitted that full opportunity was afforded to the petitioner by the Enquiry Officer and then by the Disciplinary Authority before imposing punishment of compulsory retirement.
He, however, could not point out to any document or any pleading showing that any such notice or opportunity was given to the petitioner before imposing the cut in pension of the petitioner.
6.
The counsel for the respondent-bank, though could not show any show-cause notice issued to the petitioner before imposing a cut in his pension but during the course of his argument he handed over a copy of a Memorandum to the Board of Directors dated 612001.
This related to an issue of Compulsory Retirement Pension to the petitioner.
After noticing the fact that the petitioner was charged and punished, it is mentioned as follows in the Memorandum :-  "Regulation 33 of UCO Bank (Employees') Pension Regulations, 1995 provides that an employee compulsorily retired from service as a penalty on or after 1.11.1993 in terms of Discipline and Appeal Regulations or settlement by the authority higher than the authority competent to impose such penalty may be granted pension at a rate not less than 2/3rd and not more than full pension admissible to him on the date of his compulsory retirement if otherwise he was entitled to such pension on superannuation on that date.
The regulation further states that whenever in the case of bank employee the Competent Authority passes an order awarding a pension less than the full compensation pension admissible under the regulations, the Board of Directors shall be consulted before such order is passed.
It also adds that the pension thus granted shall not be less than Rs. 375/- per month.
Considering the nature of charges as proved against Mr. Sharma said the consequent punishment awarded to him it has been decided by the Competent Authority to consider a Compulsory Retirement Pension @ 2/3rd of pension to Mr. Sharma.
In view of the requirement of Regulation 33 of the UCO Bank (Employees') Pension Regulations, 1955, the above mentioned decision of the Competent Authority is placed before the Board of Directors for their necessary consideration and approval.
The Board of Directors are requested to consider the same and accord their necessary approval of the draft resolution appended below :-" The draft resolution appended for approval as referred above was to the effect that the petitioner be granted 2/3rd of his pension by way of compulsory retirement pension.
This draft resolution was approved under the signatures of the Secretary to the Board.
This document handed over during the concluding stages of argument has been marked as Annexure `A' and kept with the record.
On this basis the petitioner had been allowed pension at the rate of 2/3rd of the pension payable to him.
8.
It is now clear that no opportunity was ever given to the petitioner before passing the order Annexure `A', which imposed a cut in the pension of the petitioner to the extent of 1/3rd of the pension payable to the him.
This order was never communicated to the petitioner.
The petitioner never got any opportunity to contest the same and apparently learnt about it for the first time during the concluding stages of the arguments.
9.
The attempt on the part of the counsel to justify the action of the Bank by saying that opportunity during the enquiry and before the Disciplinary Authority was granted has no relevance.
The respondent's counsel ought to have appreciated that the petitioner had not challenged the punishment of compulsory retirement and this was so pointed out to him.
It is only subsequent action/orders, whereby the cut in his pension was imposed and his gratuity and leave encashment have been withheld were under challenge.
The question thus would be to see if any opportunity of hearing was required to be afforded to the petitioner before imposing the cut and if any such opportunity was so afforded to him or not.
The counsel had in fact conceded that no show notice, as such was issued to the petitioner for the purposes of imposing the cut in his pension or before withholding his gratuity and leave encashment.
It can be seen that Regulation 33 is an enabling provision for imposing cut in the pension but it cannot automatically follow upon the award of punishment of compulsory retirement.
The wording of the regulation clearly reveals that this provision is basically for grant of pension in case of an officer compulsorily retired at a rate which cannot be less than 2/3rd of the payable pension.
Not only this, the Regulation 33(2) clearly indicates that competent authority is required to pass an order and that Board of Directors is also to be consulted before such order is made.
In this context, it is provided in the Regulation that the payment of pension shall not be less than 2/3rd of the pension that is admissible and payable.
Significantly, the wording of Regulation in this regard is "may be granted pension at a rate not less than two-third and not more than full pension admissible to him."
It means that even if required, cut of more than 1/3rd of the pension payable cannot be imposed.
From the wording it is clear that the pension payable cannot be less than 2/3rd.
The wording of the Regulation would reveal that it can be more than 2/3rd of the pension payable which may be full pension payable.
It would thus follow that in a deserving case no cut even may be imposed or even if imposed it could be less than 1/3rd as well.
Obviously, the cut in pension has to be on the basis of facts and circumstances in each case which may relate to the service rendered by the person, his liability, the nature of allegations and other such factors.
10.
As is seen, the petitioner by putting in 28 years of service which is countable as 33 years of service for the purpose of pension has acquired a right to earn pension but for this punishment.
Since the punishment is only compulsory retirement the right to pension would continue.
Denial of pension in full or in part would result in civil consequences.
This denial, as such, has to be by passing an order that too after application of mind to the case.
Question would then arise whether withholding of pension in part could be done or ordered or achieved without following the principles of natural justice.
In short, it is to be seen if the petitioner could have been denied the part of pension payable to him without affording him an opportunity of hearing as that facet of principle of natural justice would clearly be attracted in this case.
It is also required to be seen if the principle of fair hearing in the case would apply in the absence of specific requirement in the Regulations.
There is no need to notice in detail various rules relating to natural justice but two fundamental maxims in this regard have now become deeply ingrained in common conscience of mankind and these are `opportunity of hearing' and that `no one can be a judge of his own cause.'
These two rules have been considered necessary to ensure that the law is applied objectively, fairly and impartially.
In the present case one is mainly concerned with the first rule relating to opportunity of hearing.
In the recent past concept of natural justice has been made to access the field kept out of its purview during earlier period.
In England, before the decision of House of Lords in Ridge v. Baldwin, 1964 AC 40, it was generally throught that the rules of natural justice apply only to judicial or quasi judicial proceedings, which concept, however, changed after this decision.
Here in our country, this was the position before the Supreme Court decision in State of Orissa v. Dr. Binapani Dei, AIR 1967 SC 1269.
It was held in this case that even an administrative order or decision in the matter involving civil consequences has to be made consistently with the rules of natural justice.
Then in AK Kraipak v. Union of India, AIR 1970 SC 150, Hon'ble Supreme Court held "If the purpose of these Rules of natural justice is to prevent miscarriage of justice one fails to see why these rules should be made inapplicable to administrative employees.
Often times it is not easy to draw the line that demarcates administrative enquiry from quasi-judicial.
Arriving at just decision is the aim of both the enquiries.
An unjust decision in an administrative enquiry may have more far reaching effect than a decision in a quasi judicial enquiry."
In Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India, AIR 1978 SC 597 the rule of "audi alteram partem" was emphasized with the observation that this rule was highly effective to ensure that statutory authority arrives at a just decision and it is calculated to act as healthy check on the abuse of misuse of power.
It was also observed that its reach should not be narrowed and its applicability circumscribed.
11.
It would be seen that AK Kraipak's case (supra), almost brought to an end the distinction, if any, between quasi judicial and administrative decision.
Numerous authorities, both local and central are exercising administrative powers.
Thus denying the principle of natural justice would certainly result in grave consequences.
In all such cases, the character of the authority is not what matters but what matters is the character of the power exercised.
If the decision of the administrative authorities effect the legal rights or interest of any individual then it must be exercised fairly.
12.
In the case of Cooper v Wandsworth Board of Works, 1863(14) CB (NS) 180 the opportunity of being heard was held essential when a Tribunal was by law vested with the power to effect the property of one of the subjects.
Lord Diplock said in the House of Lords that the right of a man to be given a fair opportunity of hearing what is alleged against him and of presenting his own case is so fundamental to that civilized legal system that it is to be presumed that Parliament intended that a failure to observe it should render null and void any decision in breach of this requirement.
[See O'Reilly v. Mackman, 1983(2) AC 237].
13.
The maxim "Audi Alteram Partem" would entail notice of the case to be met and opportunity to explain.
While dealing with this aspect of the matter, one may have also to see if there are any exceptions to the application of principles of natural justice.
As observed by Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of AK Kraipak v. Union of India, AIR 1970 SC 150 "The rules of natural justice can operate the law but cannot supplant it."
The Court further said that if a statutory provision either specifically or by inevitable implication excludes the application of the rules of natural justice, then the Court cannot ignore the mandate of the Legislature.
Whether or not the application of the principles of natural justice in a given case has been excluded, wholly or in part, in the exercise of statutory powers, depends upon the language and basic scheme of the provision conferring the power, the nature of the power, the purpose for which it is conferred and the effect of the exercise of that power.
14.
One may not be required to go further into the matter to discuss the situation where rule of natural justice is sought to be excluded by necessary implication though not expressly excluded because that is not the case set up or pleaded on behalf of the respondents.
It may, however, require notice that the Hon'ble Supreme Court after noticing and referring to various decisions on the subject held in Swadeshi Cotton Mills v. Union of India, AIR 1981 SC 818 that 'In short, the general principle - as distinguished from an absolute rule of uniform application - seems to be that where a statute does not, in terms, exclude this rule of prior hearing but contemplates a post-decisional hearing amounting to a full review of the original order on merits, then such a statute would be construed as excluding the audi alteram partem rule at the pre-decisional stage.
Conversely, if the statute conferring the power is silent with regard to the giving of a pre-decisional hearing to the person affected and the administrative decision taken by the authority involves civil consequences of a grave nature, and no full review or appeal on merits against that decision is provided, Courts will be extremely reluctant to construe such a statute as excluding the duty of affording even a minimal hearing shorn of all its formal trappings and dilatory features at the pre-decisional stage, unless, viewed pragmatically, it would paralyze the administrative process or frustrate the need for utmost promptitude.
In short, this rule of fairplay "must not be jettisoned save in very exceptional circumstances where compulsive necessity so demands".
The Court must make every effort to salvage this cardinal rule to the maximum extent possible with situational modifications.
But, to recall the words of Bhagwati, J, the core of it must, however, remain, namely, that the person affected must have reasonable opportunity of being heard and the hearing must be a genuine hearing and not an empty public relations exercise."
15.
Keeping in view the above position of law, one has to see if the principles of fair hearing are attracted in this case or if these would apply to nullify the orders passed.
Denial of part of pension certainly involves civil consequences and no full review of appeal against that denial has been provided.
The principle of fair hearing has not been specifically excluded by Regulation 33.
Accordingly, the petitioner would be entitled to reasonable opportunity of being heard and as held by Hon'ble Supreme Court it must be a genuine hearing and not empty public relation exercise.
Admittedly, no such opportunity was even provided to the petitioner either pre or past decision stages.
16.
Observing minutely one can see from the language of Pension Regulation 33, that requirements of principles of natural justice of opportunity of hearing can impliedly be read into the Rule.
This Rule basically makes a provision for grant of pension which an officer being compulsorily retired is entitled to.
The Regulation only makes an enabling provision to grant pension which may not be to the full extent.
Obviously, if full pension is to be denied to a person he must be put to notice in that regard to ensure fairness.
In this case, no opportunity was ever afforded to the petitioner to present his side which he may have wished to state for not imposing any cut in his pension and for payment of full pension to him.
The action of the respondents in imposing cut of 1/3rd of the pension payable to the petitioner has certainly resulted in civil consequences for the petitioner.
Since this action of imposing cut in the pension has been made without hearing the petitioner or disclosing any cause to him, as to why this cut was being imposed, the same is clearly in violation of the principles of natural justice of fair hearing.
Principles of fair hearing are required to be read in this Regulation as already stated.
These have neither been specifically excluded not can these be excluded by implication.
Normally the exclusion by implication is when there is a need for utmost promptitude and delay would paralyze the administrative process.
No such consideration arise in the present case.
This part of the action, as such, cannot be sustained on the ground of violation of principle of natural justice of fair hearing.
In Re : Withholding of Gratuity  17.
So far withholding of gratuity is concerned the respondents have only relied upon Para 46 of the Service Regulations to justify their action.
This Regulation reads as under :-  "46.
(1) Every officer, shall be eligible for gratuity on :- (a) retirement (b) death (c) disablement rendering him unfit for further service as certified by a medical officer approved by the Bank; (d) resignation after completing ten years of continuous service; or (e) termination of service in any other way except by way of punishment after completion of 10 years of service."
Basically the contents of para 46(1)(e) of the Regulation reproduced above have been pressed by the respondents to withhold gratuity.
This para again makes a provision for grant of gratuity by laying down as to how all would be eligible for payment of gratuity.
Accordingly, officers on their retirement, death, disablement rendered unfit to further service, resignation after completing 10 years of service are eligible and entitled for payment of gratuity.
It is then provided under Clause 46(1)(e) of the Regulation that in case of termination of service after completion of 10 years of service, officer is also eligible for gratuity except where termination is by way of punishment.
Thus an officer whose services are terminated is also entitled to the payment of gratuity but this termination (emphasis supplied) should not be by way of punishment.
It has been contended that since the petitioner was compulsorily retired by way of punishment, he is not eligible for payment of gratuity in view of para 46(1)(e) of the Service Regulations.
This argument in my view cannot seek support from the contents of the Regulation relied upon.
The difference and distinction between compulsory retirement and other forms of termination of service is required to be appreciated and kept in view.
Termination of service can result on account of different penalties that are awardable under the Disciplinary Regulations of the Bank.
As per these Regulations, major penalties awardable to an officer are enumerated in para 4 of the said Regulations.
The reduction in lower stage of time scale, reduction to lower grade or post, compulsory retirement, removal from service and dismissal are major penalties provided under the Disciplinary Regulations.
It is thus, seen that termination of service has not been provided as a punishment under the Disciplinary Regulations.
The term 'termination of service' in para 46(1)(e) of the Service Regulations apparently is used in a literal sense.
If compulsory retirement is allowed to be included in this term 'termination of service' to deny the benefit of gratuity to an employee so punished then obvious difference and distinction between this punishment of compulsory retirement and removal from service, dismissal would cease to exist.
If compulsory retirement can lead to withholding of the gratuity then gratuity would not be payable in case of all these punishments of compulsory retirement, removal and dismissal.
Would it be permissible having regard to the nature and gravity of the three punishments which are distinctive in nature ?
Even dismissal and removal are two different forms of punishments though these both may be leading to termination as such.
[See Dr. Dattatraya Mahadev Nadkarni since deceased by his LRs.
v. The Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay, 1992(3) SCT 150 (SC) : JT 1992(1) SC 495].
Compulsory retirement can certainly not be equated with `dismissal or removal'.
The award of this punishment leads to end of service but as retirement though compulsory.
It cannot be allowed to operate as dismissal or removal.
It can reasonably be equated with retirement used in para 46(1)(e) of the Service Regulations.
Compulsory retirement would be nearer to retirement than termination, removal, dismissal etc.
It would otherwise also sound totally illogical that a person who is compulsorily retired would be entitled to the grant of pension but he is not eligible or entitled to payment of the gratuity.
Right of the petitioner to gratuity is statutory right and no provision has specifically been pointed out which could authorize withholding of the gratuity as a major punishment or otherwise.
The provisions of para 46 of the Service Regulations are providing for the conditions of eligibility for payment of gratuity and cannot be construed to justify the forfeiture of gratuity except in case of clear termination by way of removal or dismissal.
Forfeiting the gratuity, payable to the petitioner after the order of compulsory retirement in fact may amount to a punishment which is not permissible by any provision statutory or otherwise applicable to the petitioner.
Reliance on para 46 as already discussed in this case would not entitle the respondents to withhold the gratuity payable to the petitioner.
Though not relied upon by the respondent-bank but a copy of the Employees Gratuity Fund Rules was found annexed with the compilation handed over by the counsel for the bank along with the Statutory Regulations as referred to above.
Rule 3 of these Rules regulates the payment of gratuity to the employees.
The same is reproduced below :-  "3.
Gratuity shall be payable to an employee in case of (a) retirement on superannuation or (b) voluntary retirement or resignation or (c) termination of service by the Bank or (d) death whilst in the service of the Bank, in the manner and subject to the condition hereinafter mentioned : (a) On retirement on superannuation : On retirement on or after attaining the age of 58 years, gratuity will be payable at the rate of one month's salary for each completed year of active service, subject to a maximum of 15 months' salary.
(b) On voluntary retirement or resignation from the Bank's service or on termination of service by the Bank, after completion of 10 years' service in the Banks on ground other than misconduct such as insubordination, moral turpitude, fraud or any act of commission or omission on his part resulting in financial loss to the Bank."
Then Rule 10 makes an provision for forfeiture of gratuity which reads as under :-  "10.
(a) The gratuity of an employee to all employees shall be wholly forfeited if the services have been terminated on account of any misconduct resulting in financial loss or damage to the Bank, shall be forfeited to the extent of the damage or loss so caused.
(b) The gratuity payable to an employee shall be wholly forfeited if the services of such employee have been terminated for any act which constitutes an offence involving moral turpitude provided that, such offence is committed by him in the course of his employment."
Thus, it is clear that as per these Rules, gratuity can be forfeited only in the case of termination of services when it is done for an offence involving moral turpitude.
The question again then is to see whether the compulsory retirement can be equated with termination of service or not.
It has already been noticed above that termination of service is not provided as a punishment whereas compulsory retirement is a punishment.
Termination of service would result in complete cessation of Master and Servant relationship as in the case of dismissal and removal but the punishment of compulsory retirement would maintain such relationship for the purpose of grant of retiral benefits.
This can be seen even from the Pension Regulations framed by the bank.
Chapter 5 of these Regulations refer to a Clause of Pension and it covers superannuation pension, pension on voluntary retirement, invalid pension, compassionate allowance, premature retirement pension and compulsory retirement pension (emphasis supplied).
It is then specifically provided in Regulation 33, reproduced above, about the compulsory retirement pension.
It is thus, clear that compulsory retirement though may bring to an end the relationship of Master and Servant but it does not end such relationship for the purpose of grant of retiral benefits.
Though in different context even Hon'ble Supreme Court in case reported as UCO Bank v. Sanawar Mal, 2004 Labour & Industrial Cases 1752 noticed the distinction between the resignation and voluntary retirement to say that the resignation brings about complete cessation of Master and Servant relationship whereas voluntary retirement maintained the relationship for the purpose of grant of retiral benefits.
A similar analogy can be drawn in the case at hand.
Here also the right of the petitioner to earn retiral benefits would continue to subsist.
Accordingly, it cannot be said that the services of the petitioner were terminated to deny him the right to his gratuity in terms of Regulation 46 relied upon by the respondent-bank or the other Rules referred to above.
In any case, the petitioner also had acquired a right to receive the gratuity after putting in long service and the same has been denied to him without issuing any show cause notice or giving him any opportunity to urge anything against such a proposed action or order.
Apart from the other grounds, this order is not sustainable in view of the violation principles of natural justice and of denial of opportunity of hearing to the petitioner.
This order, as such, is also not sustainable.
In Re : Leave Encashment  18.
To justify the denial of leave encashment to the petitioner the respondents have relied upon amended paragraph 38 of the Service Regulations.
This Regulation provides as under :-  "Lapse of Leave.
- "38.
Save as provided below, all the leave to the credit of an officer shall lapse on resignation, retirement, death, discharge, dismissal or termination : Provided that where an officer retires from the bank's service he shall be eligible to be paid a sum equivalent to the emoluments of any period, not exceeding 240 days, of privilege leave that he had accumulated : Provided further that where an officer dies while in service, there shall be payable to his legal representatives, a sum equivalent to the emoluments for the period, not exceeding 240 days, of privilege leave to his credit as on the date of his death."
Here again it is contended that the petitioner is not entitled to leave encashment as his services stood terminated by the order of compulsory retirement.
The respondents again are apparently not clearly appreciating the provisions of Regulation 38 reproduced above.
This Regulation makes a provision for lapse of leave by saying that all leave to the credit of an officer shall lapse on resignation, retirement, death, discharge, dismissal or termination.
This part of the Regulation is not making provision for payment of leave encashment and only talks of lapse of leave in the eventualities as mentioned in the Regulation.
If this contention of the respondents is to be upheld then even on retirement, death/discharge, etc. the leave encashment should not be payable as the leave is supposed to lapse in these eventualities as well.
This provision only makes it clear that in the events, as mentioned in the Regulation leave to the credit will lapse.
The provision in regard to the payment of leave encashment is made in the proviso, wherein it is stated that when an officer retires from a bank service, he shall be eligible to be paid a sum equivalent to the emoluments of any period not exceeding 249 days of privilege leave that he had accumulated.
Second proviso makes a provision for payment of leave encashment to the legal representative of the officer who dies while in service.
The proviso makes a retired employee eligible for payment of leave encashment.
Contention, though not raised, appears to be that the petitioner had not been retired but was terminated and would not be eligible for the leave encashment.
The submission made was only that the leave would lapse in case of termination.
I am forced to repeat that the petitioner had been retired though compulsorily and cannot be treated as dismissed, removed or terminated employee.
End of his employment is with the grant of retiral benefits.
Since the petitioner, as already held cannot be treated as terminated employee, his right to receive leave encashment cannot be denied.
Even otherwise, a bare reading of this provision would show that the action of not paying leave encashment to the petitioner on the basis of this Regulation is apparently misconceived.
The leave due to the petitionr may have lapsed on account of coming to end of his service.
The petitioner is an officer who has been retired though compulsorily.
At least this provision i.e. Regulation 38 of the Service Regulations to my mind cannot be advanced to deny the payment of leave encashment to the petitioner.
Reading of the part of Regulation relating to lapse of leave to say that the petitioner would not be entitled to receive encashment of leave that he had accumulated, in my view, may do violation to the provisions of the Regulations.
This order again has been passed without affording any opportunity of hearing to the petitioner.
If the petitioner had been given opportunity of hearing, by serving of notice before passing the order, he was well within his rights to offer his explanation that the provisions of Regulations 38 and 46 both the case of payment of leave encashment and gratuity cannot be advanced to deny these benefits to him.
The order in regard to withholding of leave encashment accordingly cannot also stand.
Conclusion  19.
In view of the foregoing discussion, the action of respondent Bank in paying pension by imposing cut of 1/3rd of the pension by paying 2/3rd of his pension payable cannot be sustained due to violation of rules of natural justice.
However, in order to ensure fair play to both the sides and specially in view of the enabling provisions made in Pension Regulation 33, it would only be fair if the respondents are given a chance to pass an order afresh after following the principles of natural justice by issuing show cause notice to the petitioner in case they intend to deny full pension to the petitioner in terms of the said Regulations.
Accordingly, while setting aside the order directing the payment of pension at 2/3rd of the pension payable to the petitioner, liberty is granted to the respondent to pass a fresh order in this regard after serving notice to the petitioner and by providing him proper opportunity of hearing if it is intended to impose any cut in his pension.
In other words, it would be open for the respondents to decide if they wish to impose any cut in the pension or to what extent they wish to grant pension to the petitioner, having regard to the facts and circumstances and to the explanation that the petitioner may furnish.
20.
Similarly, the order withholding the gratuity payable to the petitioner is again not sustainable either on merits or on account of not following the principles of natural justice.
The same is accordingly set aside with a direction that the gratuity payable to the petitioner which has been wrongly withheld be now paid to him within two months of the receipt of copy of this order, failing which the petitioner will be entitled to interest on the amount payable to him at the rate of 6% from the date it is due till date of the payment.
21.
So would be the fate of the order denying payment of leave encashment to the petitioner.
The order in this regard is also set aside with a direction to the respondents to release the amount payable to the petitioner.
This amount shall also carry interest at 6% per annum from the date it is due to the date of payment, in case the payment is not released within two months from the date of receipt of the copy of the order.
The writ petition is accordingly allowed in the above said terms.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.