Kiran Anand Lall, J - Narinder Singh plaintiff (respondent herein) filed a suit challenging the validity of order bearing No. 2671/I & C dated 371984 issued by the Chief Engineer (Central), PWD B&R Branch, Patiala, imposing penalty of stoppage of two increments with cumulative effect on him, besides ordering recovery of Rs. 52,533.47 from him.
The trial Court declared the order to be illegal, null and void and against the principles of natural justice and decreed the suit.
The defendant-State (appellant herein) filed appeal but that too was dismissed by the Additional District Judge.
2.
The facts of the case are that the plaintiff was served with a charge-sheet dated 1391973, stating therein that in May, 1971, he had delayed the handing over the charge and also record, for a period of one year and nine months, despite issuance of several letters to him by the authorities.
Besides, he did not maintain proper accounts of stock/material, leading to shortage to the tune of Rs. 54,95304 paise, detailed in Annexures A and B attached with the plaint.
He filed reply to the charge-sheet, appending several annexures consisting of 17 pages, in proof of his innocence.
On 20121974, Shri BS Malhotra was appointed as the Enquiry Officer for holding the enquiry.
On the same day the Chief Engineer passed a separate order directing him to make good and loss, and also directed that 50% of the amount of shortage be deducted from his salary.
Before any evidence could be recorded, Shri BS Malhotra expired, leading to the appointment of a new enquiry officer, Shri JP Kohli.
No intimation was, however, sent to the plaintiff about the appointment of new enquiry officer.
But, before any date of hearing could be fixed in the enquiry, Shri JP Kohli, also died, and he was replaced by Shri Satinder Singh, Superintending Engineer, National Highways, vide orders dated 16.2.1979.
The latter fixed three dates of hearing viz. 22.12.1979, 21.2.1980 and 2821980 in the enquiry but did not send any communication in this regard to the plaintiff.
The enquiry was, ultimately, adjourned to 3071980.
The plaintiff protested against the manner in which dates of hearing had been fixed without giving any intimation to him.
The enquiry officer felt annoyed and got him suspended.
Ultimately, the plaintiff received the impugned order dated 371984 vide which the punishing authority had stopped his two increments with cumulative effect, besides ordering the recovery of Rs. 52,533.47 from him.
3.
The defendant-State contested the suit, pleading that the enquiry was held as per the procedure prescribed under the rules and taking up certain legal objections.
4.
The trial Court as well as the first appellate Court decided the suit in favour of the plaintiff and against the defendant-State.
The latter, therefore, filed the present second appeal before this Court.
5.
After having heard arguments from both sides and having gone through the trial Court record, I find nothing wrong with the concurrent finding of the two Courts below in respect of the illegality of the impugned order.
penalty of stoppage of increments with cumulative effect (along with recovery of the amount of pecuniary loss caused to the Government), undisputedly, falls under the category of major penalty as provided in the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment & Appeal) Rules, 1970, and major penalty cannot be imposed on an employee, without conducting a regular departmental enquiry.
It is in the judgments of both the Courts below, that though a charge-sheet was served on the plaintiff and he had filed reply thereto denying the charges, and enquiry officers, one after the other, were also appointed but, it appears, that none of the enquiry officers recorded any evidence.
On being repeatedly told by this Court to point out if any evidence was recorded during the enquiry, the learned Assistant Advocate General could not point out any.
Even if it is assumed, for the sake of arguments, that the plaintiff had absented himself from the enquiry proceedings, still the enquiry officer was required to proceed ex parte against him and record the evidence of department/State in support of the charges.
But, he did not do so.
Learned Assistant Advocate General referred to a letter No. 1068 dated 981982 addressed by the enquiry officer to the Chief Engineer, stating that it was not possible for him to proceed further with the enquiry.
The Chief Engineer, however, did not take any action in this regard and simply directed the enquiry officer to proceed with the enquiry and submit his report.
The record does not indicate that, thereafter, the enquiry officer held the enquiry and submitted any enquiry report to the punishing authority, or not.
The learned Assistant Advocate General could not show any enquiry report, even during the course of arguments.
6.
No doubt, the impugned order dated 371984 vide which the punishing authority (Chief Engineer (Central), PWD, B&R Branch) had imposed a major penalty on the plaintiff, does refer to an ex parte enquiry report, but no such report could be shown by the learned Assistant Advocate General, to this Court.
Therefore, it is not known as to on what basis the punishing authority had held the plaintiff to be guilty of the charges framed against him.
Otherwise also, the impugned order shows that the punishing authority had not recorded any reason for agreeing with the (non-existent) report of the enquiry officer.
The same is, therefore, clearly a non-speaking order which could not be legally allowed to stand and deserved to be set aside, and this is what the trial Court and the first appellate Court did.
There being no fault with the concurrent finding of the Courts below about the illegality of the impugned order, the appeal has to be dismissed, and it is so ordered.
Parties shall, however, bear their own costs.
Appeal dismissed.