SS Saron, J - The petitioner is working as a Peon at Govt.
Girls Senior Secondary School, Kanina Mandi, District Mohindergarh.
He was appointed as a Peon in the respondent Department on 22.9.1989 on regular basis.
He passed his matriculation on 571993 and thus, became eligible for promotion as Lab Attendant or Clerk.
The minimum prescribed qualification for the said post is Matriculation with Science subjects.
The District Education Officer, Narnaul (respondent No. 3), vide order dated 2841997 (Annexure P-1) promoted respondent Nos. 4 and 5 as Lab Attendants on the basis of the seniority list as it stood on 111997.
The said promotion, however, was for a stipulated period.
The case of the petitioner had also been sought for promotion but he was not promoted.
Aggrieved by the action of the official respondents, the petitioner sent a legal notice dated 25.3.1999 (Annexure P-2).
It was represented by the petitioner that he was senior to respondent Nos. 4 and 5, who were promoted vide order dated 2841997 (Annexure P-1).
There being inaction on the representation, the petitioner, alongwith other five employees, filed C.W.P.
No. 11340 of 1999 in this Court, which was disposed of on 1681999 (Annexure P-3) with the direction to Director of Secondary Education, Haryana (respondent No. 2) to consider and decide the legal notice within a period of three months of the receipt of copy of the order.
In consequence of the order passed by this Court, the legal notice of the petitioner and others was rejected by the District Education Officer, Narnaul (respondent No. 3) on 6101999 (Annexure P-4) by observing that the seniority of the selected candidates was to be determined from the date of passing the matriculation examination and not from the date of appointment.
In this petition under Articles 226 & 227 of the Constitution of India, the order dated 2841997 (Annexure P-1) promoting the respondent Nos. 4 to 5 to the post of Lab Attendant and the rejection order dated 6101999 (Annexure P-4) passed by the District Education Officer, Narnaul (respondent No. 3) declining the claim of the petitioner for promotion of Lab Attendant, are impugned.
Besides, a direction is sought to promote the petitioner w.e.f.
2841997 i.e. the date his juniors respondent Nos. 4 and 5 were promoted with all consequential benefits.
A further direction is sought to decide the seniority of Class-IV employees on the basis of length of service and not on the basis of date of passing the matriculation examination as held by this Court in Bhiwani Parshad v. State of Haryana and others, 2000(1) RSJ 495 : 2000(2) SCT 74.
2.
On notice of motion, written statement has been filed by Shri Sajjan Singh, HES-I, District Education Officer, Narnaul, on behalf of respondent No. 1 to 3.
It is stated that as per the Government of Haryana, Department of Education instructions dated 21101987 (Annexure R-1), the seniority of Class-IV employees for promotion to the post of Laboratory Attendant was to be determined from the date of passing the matriculation examination with the subjects General Science/Physics, Chemistry, Life Science or from the date of entry into Govt. service, whichever is later.
It is stated that the Class-IV employees who were promoted to the post of Laboratory Attendant, vide order dated 2841997, were senior to the petitioner.
3.
In the separate written statement filed by respondent Nos. 4 and 5, it is stated that they were promoted as Laboratory Attendants vide order dated 2841997.
However, in the year 1998, the post of Laboratory Attendant has been declared as Class-III post from that of Class-IV.
Besides, vide order dated 18.3.1999 (Annexure R-5/1), it has been decided that promotion shall be made at the Directorate level.
It is stated that this means that all Class-IV employees working in the State of Haryana become eligible for consideration and promotion which is to be made at the State level.
It is also stated that further promotions were made thereafter and one such promotion order dated 2882001 (Annexure R-5/2) has been placed on record.
It is also stated that persons junior to the respondent Nos. 4 and 5 have been promoted as Laboratory Attendants.
This, it is stated, would show that if respondent Nos. 4 and 5 had not been promoted in the year 1997, then they were entitled to be promoted when their juniors were promoted.
Therefore, it is stated that even if the Writ Petition is to be allowed, the respondent Nos. 4 and 5 are not liable to be disturbed and rather, the junior-most persons at the State level are liable to be reverted.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that in view of the ratio of the judgment of a Division Bench of this Court in Bhiwani Parshad's case (supra), the petitioner is senior to respondent Nos. 4 and 5 and therefore, is entitled to be promoted to the post of Lab Attendant w.e.f.
2841997 i.e. the date his juniors were promoted.
Besides it is contended that the case is fully covered by the Division Bench judgment of this Court in the case of Ram Autar v. State of Haryana, 2003(1) RSJ 150 : 2003(2) SCT 559.
Therefore, it is contended that the petitioner is liable to be promoted as Lab Attendant w.e.f.
2841997.
5.
In response, learned counsel for the State and the private respondent Nos. 4 and 5 submit that the seniority of the Class-IV employees is to be determined from the date of passing the matriculation examination in accordance with the instructions dated 21101987 (Annexure R-1) and that the petitioner has no claim for seniority from the date of promotion of respondent Nos. 4 and 5.
6.
We have given our thoughtful consideration to the contentions of the learned counsel appearing for the parties.
It is appropriate to note that in Ram Autar's case (supra), a similar request made by the petitioner therein for promotion to the post of Lab Attendant having been declined was assailed by the said petitioner in this Court.
The claim of the petitioner therein was declined on the ground that he had not acquired the essential eligible qualification of matric as prescribed by the rules, and as the private respondent therein acquired the said qualification prior to the petitioner in the said petition, he was promoted earlier to the petitioner.
A Division Bench of this Court in Ram Autar's case (supra) relying on an earlier judgment in the case of Sakur Khan v State of Haryana and others, C.W.P.
No. 14693 of 1995, disposed of the writ petition with the direction to the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner in the light of the judgment passed in Sakur Khan's case (supra) and pass appropriate orders granting consequential benefits, notional or otherwise, to the petitioner from the date his junior was promoted within a period of four months from the date the certified copy of the order is brought to their notice.
In Sakur Khan's case (supra), a Division Bench of this Court had held as follows :  "As observed above, the petitioner was senior to Shri Idrish in the feeder cadre but Shri Idrish was promoted as Laboratory Attendant simply on the ground that he had obtained eligibility qualifications prior to the petitioner.
We are of the view that the stand of the respondents is not well based.
The petitioner had a right to be considered for promotion when Shri Idrish was promoted as he was senior to Shri Idrish and was duly qualified for the post of Laboratory Attendant.
Consequently, we allow this writ petition and direct the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion to Laboratory Attendant with effect from the date Shri Idrish was promoted as such.
Let these directions be carried out within a period of three months of the receipt of a copy of this order from this Court or a certified copy thereof from the petitioner.
Needless to mention that if the petitioner is promoted from the date with effect from when Shri Idrish was promoted as Laboratory Attendant, he would be entitled to all consequential benefits."
7.
The ratio of the judgment in Ram Autar's case (supra) and Sakur Khan's case (supra) fully applies to the facts and circumstances of the case in hand.
It may be noticed that in the case in hand, the petitioner was appointed as a Peon on regular basis on 22.9.1989 and he passed his matriculation examination on 571993 whereas Ram Avtar (respondent No. 4) was appointed as Class-IV on 771990 and Ram Kishan (respondent No. 5) was appointed on 12111990.
Therefore, the petitioner on the basis of length in service is senior to the respondent Nos. 4 and 5.
Ram Avtar (respondent No. 4) passed his matriculation examination on 1271987 and Ram Kishan (respondent No. 5) passed the same on 78986.
In Sakur Khan's case (supra), the petitioner therein claimed that he should be considered or promotion to the post of Laboratory Attendant from the date his junior was promoted.
It was held that the relevant date for seeing the eligibility would be the date of consideration and accordingly, the directions as noticed above were issued, in respect of which we have already observed that a different view is not warranted.
8.
Accordingly, we dispose of this Writ Petition with the direction to the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion as Laboratory Attendant or Clerk w.e.f.
2841997 in the light of the aforesaid two judgments and if found suitable in other respects, pass appropriate orders promoting him as Laboratory Attendant and grant all consequential benefits, notional or otherwise from the date his juniors were promoted.
This consideration process shall be done within a period of four months from the date the certified copy of this order is brought to their notice.
Petition allowed.