Surya Kant, J - Vide this judgment, three writ petitions i.e. CWP No. 19788 of 2002, 13927 and 13955 of 2003 are being disposed of as common question of law and facts are involved in these writ petitions.
It may be mentioned that after hearing learned counsel for the parties and having found that these writ petitions are covered by the judgment dated 1852004 passed by a coordinate Bench in C.W.P.
No. 12985 of 2004, we allowed the same for the detailed reasons to follow.
Here are those reasons.
C.W.P.
No 19788 of 2002  2.
The petitioners have approached this Court for issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari for quashing of an order dated 582002 (Annexure P- 7) whereby they were refused appointment to the posts of Block Extension Educators on regular basis rather were offered the same on contractual basis.
The petitioners have further sought a direction to appoint them on the afore- mentioned posts on regular basis.
3.
Undisputedly, the petitioners have been working as Multi Purpose Health Workers in the Department of Health and Family Welfare on regular basis and have already been confirmed in service.
In response to an advertisement dated 161999 (Annexure P-1) issued by the Subordinate Services Selection Board (in short the Board), they applied for 40 posts of Black Extension Educators which were advertised in the pre-revised pay scale of Rs. 1410-2640.
The petitioners were selected and their names were recommended by the Board for appointment vide memo dated 7122001 (annexure P-2).
The petitioners, however, were offered appointment on contract basis for a period of one year on payment of lump-sum salary of Rs. 7,000/- per month which they refused to accept.
They served the Department with a legal notice in response to which the Director, Health and Family Welfare, Punjab vide his letter dated 812002 (Annexure P- 6) favourably recommended their case.
However, the State Govt. turned down the same vide the impugned order dated 582002 (Annexure P-7) on the ground that since the appointments were offered against the posts sanctioned under a centrally sponsored scheme and the Finance Department of the State Govt. had issued instructions on 6.12.2001 that appointments under such Schemes should be made only for a fixed tern and on contractual basis, therefore, the petitioners cannot be appointed on regular basis.
This has led the petitioners to approach this Court.
C.W.P.
13927 of 2003  4.
The petitioners have sought quashing of an order dated 5.6.2003 (Annexure P-5) whereby their claim for appointment as Multi Purpose Health Workers (Male) on regular basis has been rejected and have further sought a direction for their appointment on regular basis.
The petitioners applied in response to advertisement No. 1 dated 2232001 issued by the Board for 400 posts of Multi Purpose Health Workers (Male) which were advertised in the running pay scale of Rs. 3330-6200.
The petitioners were selected and their names were recommended for appointment.
The petitioners, however, were offered appointment on contract basis only and not on regular basis which they refused to accept and served the department with a legal notice.
Thereafter, they approached this Court in C.W.P.
No. 20212 of 2002 in which directions were issued to consider and decide their claim by passing a speaking order.
Pursuant to these directions, the impugned order dated 1482003 (Annexure P- 8) has been passed rejecting the petitioners claim on the plea that since the posts are sanctioned under a Centrally Sponsored Scheme, they can be appointed on contractual basis only as per the Government Instructions dated 10.2.2001.
Challenging the afore-mentioned order that the petitioners have approached this Court.
C.W.P.
13995 of 2003  5.
The petitioners have sought quashing of an order dated 1482003 (Annexure P-8) whereby their claim for appointment as Multi Purpose Health Workers (Male) on regular basis has been rejected and have further sought a direction for their appointment on regular basis.
The petitioners applied in response to advertisement No. 1 dated 2232001 issued by the Board for 400 posts of Multi Purpose Health Workers (Male) which were advertised in the running pay scale of Rs. 3330-6200.
The petitioners were selected and their names were recommended for appointment.
The petitioners, however, were offered appointment on contract basis only and not on regular basis which they refused to accept and served the department with a legal notice.
Thereafter, they approached this Court in C.W.P.
No. 20212 of 2002 in which directions were issued to consider and decide their claim by passing a speaking order.
Pursuant to these directions, the impugned order dated 1482003 (Annexure P- 8) has been passed rejecting the petitioners claim on the plea that since the posts are sanctioned under a Centrally sponsored Scheme, they can be appointed on contractual basis only as per the Government Instructions dated 10.2.2001.
Challenging the afore-mentioned order that the petitioners have approached this Court.
6.
Notice of motion having been issued, written statements have been filed by respondents No. 1 and 2 as well as by respondent No. 3 namely, the Board.
Respondents No. 1 and 2, though have not disputed that the advertisement was issued by the Board for recruitment on regular basis, but have primarily relied upon a circular dated 1102001 (Annexure R-1) issued by the Finance Department directing that recruitment of the staff for implementing the Centrally sponsored Schemes should be on contract basis and not on regular basis and the appointments should automatically stand terminated with the dis-continuation of the Scheme and this fact should be mentioned in the appointment letter itself.
In some of the cases, an additional affidavit has also been filed by Dr. JS Gill, Assistant Director, Health Services, Punjab in response to an order dated 5.3.2004 passed by this Court to clarify as to when were the directions given to the Board that appointments of the selected persons should be made on contract basis instead of on regular basis as per the advertisement.
In this affidavit, it has been clarified that on receipt of the instructions dated 1102001 from the Finance Department, a letter dated 8112001 was sent to the Board informing it that the earlier letters dated 2412001 and 781998 vide which requisitions for 400 posts of Multi Purpose Health Workers (Male) and 40 posts of Block Extension Educators were sent, be treated as withdrawn and no further action should be taken on the said requisitions.
7.
Mr. PS Patwalia, learned Senior Counsel, appearing on behalf of the petitioners, at the outset informed us that a Division Bench of this Court vide judgment dated May 18, 2004 has allowed a bunch of writ petitions, including CWPs No. 16687 of 2002, 11439 of 2003 and 12281 of 2003 as well as CWP No. 12985 of 2003 and directions have been issued to appoint the writ petitioners in those cases.
He further pointed out that out of these writ petitions CWP No. 12985 of 2003 pertains to Multi Purpose Health Workers who were selected along with the present petitioners.
Mr. Patwalia, however, did not dispute the fact that the issue in relation to the instructions dated 1.
102001 of the Finance Department on the basis of which the petitioners were being offered appointments on contract basis as all of them were admittedly to be appointed under a Centrally Sponsored Scheme, was not considered and/or adjudicated upon by the Division Bench in the judgment referred to above.
He, however, contended that the petitioners cannot be denied appointments on regular basis and in regular pay scales merely because the posts against which they were to be appointed had been created under a Centrally Sponsored Scheme as according to him it can very well be incorporated in the terms and conditions of their appointments that in the event of discontinuation of the Scheme, the petitioners shall have no legally vested right to claim absorption and/or adjustment against some other posts.
According to him, the appointment of the petitioners on contractual basis is directly in breach of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India as there are hundreds of Block Extension Educators and Multi Purpose Health Workers who have been appointed on regular basis under these very Centrally Sponsored Schemes and are getting emoluments in regular pay scales though they were appointed prior to the issuance of the instructions dated 1102001 by the Finance Department.
In this regard, he has given illustration of the writ petitioners in CWP No. 19788 of 2002 who are already working as Multi Purpose Health Workers on regular basis and have been confirmed as well though they too were appointed in a Centrally Sponsored Scheme only.
They have, however, been now selected for a higher post, namely Block Extension Educator but are not being offered appointment on regular basis.
On the other hand, Mr. Boparai, learned Senior Additional Advocate General, Punjab contends that since the posts have been created temporarily under a Centrally Sponsored Scheme and are co-terminus with the Scheme itself the petitioners cannot be appointed on regular basis as availability of a permanent post is condition precedent for such appointments.
8.
It is true that the mere selection does not confer an indefeasible and legally vested right to claim appointment.
It is by now well settled by a catena of judgments of the Supreme Court, that the appointing authority can refuse appointment to a selected candidate for a valid reason.
It is, however, equally well settled that if a candidate has been selected in an open competition by a prescribed recruiting agency and is fully eligible for appointment and there is a vacancy which is required to be filled, the appointing authority cannot deny appointment merely on whims and fancies.
Applying these principles to the facts and circumstances of these cases.
We find that eligibility or suitability of the petitioners to man the posts for which they have been selected is not disputed by the respondents.
It is also admitted that the posts were advertised for recruitment on regular basis.
It is not denied that there are hundreds of persons who are working as Block Extension Educator or Multi Purpose Health Workers under the same Centrally Sponsored Scheme who have been appointed on regular basis and in regular pay scale.
Still further the respondents themselves require the services of the petitioners as they are being offered appointment on "contract basis."
9.
It appears to us that the respondents have a misconceived apprehension in their mind that if the petitioners are appointed on "regular basis", then their services cannot be dispensed with in the event of the dis-continuation of the Scheme.
We, however, find no legal or factual basis for carrying such an apprehension by the respondents.
Firstly, in para 14 of the writ petition, the petitioners themselves have averred as follows :-  "14 Therefore, it is submitted that the action of the respondents in denying them the appointment is bad for the reason that even if the posts are under Centrally Sponsored Scheme, so long the posts are sanctioned on regular basis, petitioners are entitled to get appointment in the regular pay scale and not on contractual basis."
Secondly, even if the petitioners or for that matter any other employee is appointed on regular basis and/or confirmed against a post, he does not acquire any perpetual right to continue in service even if the post has been abolished.
It is well settled that once the post is abolished in public interest, services of its incumbent can be dispensed with.
Be that as it may, we make it clear that if the Centrally Sponsored Scheme comes to an end or is discontinued, it will be open for the respondents No1 and 2 to dispense with the services of the petitioners in accordance with law.
10.
Once the apprehension in the minds of the respondents has been taken care of in terms of the directions referred to above, we are of the view that the petitioners cannot be denied appointment on regular basis and in a running pay scale.
It is the conceded position that there are several Block Extension Educators and Multi Purpose Health Workers who were appointed on regular basis and in running pay scale prior to 1102001 under the same Scheme.
It will be patently arbitrary and discriminatory if the respondents are permitted to prescribe two sets of conditions of service for the similarly situated employees who constitute one and the same cadre especially when there is no distinction between them on the basis of academic qualifications, mode of recruitment or the nature of duties.
That apart, it is also not the case of the respondents that the Central Govt. while sanctioning the Scheme has insisted upon to make appointments on contract basis or to pay the fixed monthly emoluments.
Thus, find no reasons either in law or in equity to deny appointment to the petitioners on regular basis and/or payment of emoluments in the running pay scales.
Consequently, these writ petitions are allowed.
The respondents are directed to offer appointment to the petitioners on regular basis in terms of the directions referred to above within a period of two months from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order.
No order as to costs.
Petitions allowed.