Pratap Kr.
Ray, J - Heard the learned Advocates appearing for the parties.
2.
In the instant case, it is the grievance of the petitioner that his selection for admission in the post of graduate course of Pharmacy has not been done properly and the authorities have followed admission procedure which is contrary to the University Regulation.
It has been further asserted that percentage of marks of "Gate" Examination has' been considered wrongly but the interview marks have not been allotted properly judging the merit.
3.
This writ application has been opposed by the University by filing affidavit.
In the affidavit, the University has disclosed the selection chart in respect of all the candidates who appeared in such selection for the said course under "Gate General Category."
4.
The petitioner has filed a reply.
5.
Originally, by an interim order the court allowed the petitioner to attend the lessons but the Court never granted admission of the petitioner in the said course.
6.
Matter has now come up for final hearing..  7.
The challenge with reference to the selection as made is of 2 years back.
Learned Advocate for the petitioner has invited this Court to part II of Jabalpur University First Regulations by referring to clause 7(II), which provides eligibility qualification to undergo post graduate degree courses.
That provision reads thus :  "A student who has obtained the Bachelor's decree in any courses in Engineering/Pharmacy/Architecture/Technology at any Indian University or Institution with at least 60% marks is eligible for admission to the Postgraduate course in Engineering/Technology/Pharmacy/Architecture in the corresponding subject and qualified through Graduate Aptitude Test in Engineering (GATE) Examination."
Learned Advocate for the petitioner submitted relying upon the said provision that the norms as set up by the Admission Committee of Faculty of Engineering and Technology wherein this course has been included by farming the modalities of admission whereby selection norms for "GATE category candidates" were mentioned by providing allotment of marks in the manner as (a) Gate score 70 marks and (b) interview and/or test 30 marks, was contrary to the said Regulations.
This point has no legal basis.
For admission in the post graduate course said regulation provides securing of minimum 60% marks in the graduation level of that particular stream as the minimum eligibility marks.
Clearance of the "Gate Examination" also has been mentioned as eligibility condition.
From the affidavit of the University, it appears that no candidate was selected for the said course wherein there were 20 seats of Gate General in that course who did not qualify said minimum eligibility conditions.
All the candidates secured minimum eligibility marks 60% in the graduation level of that stream with clearance of Gate Examination, including the present petitioner.
For "Gate General category" out of 20 seats, 74 candidates appeared.
From the First Statutes, 1982 under the Jabalpur University Act, 1981, which has been referred to by the learned Advocate for the University, it appears that under clause 60, a provision has been made to set up Admission Committee for each faculty council with different members as stipulated thereto.
Admission Committee has been empowered under this Statute to set up norms of selection of candidates for admission.
The relevant provision under clause 60 reads thus :  "60(1) There shall be an Admission Committee for each Faculty Council with the following members :  The Vice-Chancellor-Chairman  The Dean of the Faculty Council concerned- Vice-Chairman.
The Heads of Departments  The Dean of students The Registrar  The Superintendent of Admission-Convener  (2) The Admission Committee shall advice the Executive Council on the following matters:  Power and duties of the Admission Committee:  (a) The norms for selection of candidates for admission".
...................  Having regard to such First Statute read with First Regulations of the University, this Court is not finding any conflict and/or contradiction made by the University Authority through its Admission Committee by framing norms of selection declaring that Gate General category candidates would be selected on the aforesaid basis, namely, (1) For Gate Examination 70 marks and (b) interview 30 marks.
Having regard to such, the first contention as made by the petitioner has no basis and accordingly that contention is overruled.
The petitioner has raised another contention that 70 marks as fixed for Gate Examination has been wrongly made as 70%.
This submission also has no basis.
Learned Advocate intended to argue that in the Gate Examination there is no question of percentage of marks, but marks are allotted on percentile basis, and such percentile is fixed following the formula N/AIR + N 100.
N denotes number of candidates appeared, AIR denotes all India ranking of the candidate in the Gate Examination.
It has been submitted accordingly that percentile of marks and percentage of marks are not identical.
There is no doubt in it.
The University Authority in such selection process, which the Court is now considering has not at all fixed the marks considering the percentile marks as percentage.
On the other hand, from the affidavit-in-opposition, and particularly from the annexed document, namely, the chart, it appears that different marks were allotted to the candidates who appeared.
It appears that 70% of percentile of marks as obtained in the Gate Examination has been considered and there was no illegality to allot marks on that basis.
The petitioner has further urged that in the oral interview the petitioner was given less marks though the petitioner secured higher marks in the Gate Examination.
But on perusal of the marks chart as annexed to the opposition as annexure R-1, it appears that the petitioner was allotted 7 marks in the interview whereas petitioner scored 8517 percentile in Gate Examination and another candidate A Shajahan who scored 9898 percentile in Gate Examination, only secured 3 marks in the interview.
Having regard to such, it is clear that the contention of the petitioner has no factual basis.
Marks in the interview are based on the answer given by the candidates.
A candidate may be brilliant in the written test, but may fail in the interview.
Oral expression of any problem and explaining of that problem in writing, are completely two different things.
Furthermore, it is a settled law that allotment of marks in the interview by the expert body who allot such marks on subjective satisfaction of the candidates' oral answer, cannot be the subject matter of judicial review of the writ court.
A written test marks can be verified by a Court of law sending the matter to another expert body but the interview marks since.
depends on the oral answer and on subjective satisfaction of the members of the board, it does not come under anvil of judicial review.
8.
1t is a settled law that a candidate who appeared in the selection process and thereby being unsuccessful, cannot turn round to challenge the constitution of such selection committee and the modalities of the procedure as formulated by them knowing very well beforehand the modalities of selection as published in the brochure.
When the petitioner purchased the admission form, he got all the information and understanding all rules appeared to test his fate.
Thereafter being unsuccessful has taken this ground, which is not legally permissible applying the doctrine of estoppel and acquiescence.
9.
Considering all the aspects of the matter, accordingly this Court feels that no case has been made out by the petitioner for judicial review.
Hence, the writ application stands dismissed.
All interim orders stand vacated.
10.
Urgent xerox certified copy of the order, if applied for, be supplied expeditiously.
Petition dismissed.