Viney Mittal, J - This judgment shall dispose of three Civil Writ Petitions being Civil Writ Petition Nos. 7446, 8534 and 9825 of 2003, as similar questions of law and facts are involved in all these three aforesaid petitions.
For the sake of convenience, the facts are borrowed from Civil Writ Petition No. 7446 of 2003.
2.
The petitioners are retired employees of State of Haryana.
Petitioner No. 1, Hoshiar Singh, had retired as a Social Education & Panchayat Officer with effect from April 30, 1994.
Raghbir Singh, petitioner No. 2, had retired as Block Development & Panchayat Officer with effect from February 1, 1987.
Similarly, Ishwar Singh, petitioner No. 3, had retired as Block Development and Panchayat Officer with effect from April 1, 1994.
On their retirement, they became entitled to pensionary benefits as per their entitlement and in accordance with the relevant rules.
On March 8, 1996 the State Government took a decision that the dearness allowance linked to (AICPI) 120166 be treated as dearness pay for reckoning emoluments for the purpose of retirement gratuity/death gratuity under the State Government relevant rules.
The aforesaid decision was made applicable to Government employees who retired or died on or after April 1, 1995.
The following decision was taken with regard to enhancement :  Pay Range Dearness allowance to be added to pay for calculating gratuity 1.
Basic pay upto Rs. 3,500/- 97% of pay 2.
Basic pay upto Rs. 3,500/- pm And upto Rs. 6,000/- pm 73% of pay subject to a minimum of Rs. 3,395/- 3.
Basic pay above Rs. 6,000/- pm 63% of pay subject to a minimum of Rs. 4,380/- 3.
The petitioners, who are all retirees prior to April 1, 1995 claim discrimination.
It has been pleaded by them that the aforesaid cut off date of April 1, 1995 had created two categories of retirees.
There was neither any rationale in providing the aforesaid cut off date nor there was any distinction between the retirees who had retired prior to April, 1995 and the ones who had retired after April, 1995.
Accordingly, the aforesaid cut off date declining of the enhancement benefits to the retirees such as the petitioners, who had retired before April 1, 1995 has been impugned before the Court through the present petitions.
4.
The claim of the petitioners has been contested by the respondents.
A joint written statement has been filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 to 4.
The respondents have maintained that the State Government was within its rights to provide a cut off date and no grievance could be made by the retirees, who has retired prior to April 1, 1995, on any basis.
5.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have also gone through the record of the case.
6.
Shri RS Sangwan, learned counsel for the petitioners has placed strong reliance upon a judgment of the Apex Court in the case of V Kasturi v. Managing Director, State Bank of India, Bombay and Another, 1998(4) SCT 662 (SC) : 1999(3) All India Services Law Journal 17.
On the strength of the aforesaid judgment, it has been contended by the learned counsel that providing of a cut off date for denying certain enhanced pensionary benefits to such persons who had retired earlier than the cut off date and who prior to the grant of enhanced pensionary benefits were also entitled to the pensionary benefits under the old rules, would still be entitled to get the benefits of the amended pensionary rules and in such a situation there can be no denial of benefits to such old retirees.
Additionally, learned counsel has relied upon the judgment of the Apex Court in DS Nakara and others v. Union of India, 1983(1) SCC 305.
7.
On the other hand, Shri Anmol Rattan Sidhu, learned Additional Advocate General, Haryana has primarily placed reliance upon a judgment of the Apex Court in the case of State of West Bengal v. Monotosh Rai and others, 2002(2) SCC 71.
On the basis of the aforesaid judgment, Shri Sidhu has argued that the cut off date provided in the order Annexure P/1 was absolutely justified and, therefore, the petitioners could not claim any revised pensionary benefits under the decision Annexure P/1.
8.
We have duly considered the aforesaid contentions of the learned counsel for the parties.
In our considered view, the present petitions deserve to be allowed.
9.
In V Kasturi's case (supra) the Hon'ble Supreme Court had categorised the claim of retirees in two categories.
The following observations of the Supreme Court with regard to two categories may be relevant to notice as follows :  "Category I : If the person retiring is eligible for pension at the time of his retirement and if he survives till the time by subsequent amendment of the relevant pension scheme, he would become eligible to get enhanced pension or would become eligible to get more pension as per the new formula of computation of pension subsequently brought into force, he would be entitled to get the benefit of the amended pension provision from the date of such order as he would be member of the very same class of pensioners when the additional benefit is being conferred on all of them.
In such a situation the additional benefit available to the same class of pensioners cannot be denied to him on the ground that he had retired prior to the date on which the aforesaid additional benefit was conferred on all the members of the same class of pensioners who had survived by the time the scheme granting additional benefits to these pensioners came into force.
The line of decisions tracing their roots to the ratio of Nakara's case, 1983(1) SCC 305, would cover this category of cases.
Category II : However, if an employee at the time of his retirement is not eligible for earning pension and stands outside the class of pensioners, if subsequently by amendment of relevant pension Rules any beneficial umbrella of pension scheme is extended to cover a new class of pensioners and when such a subsequent scheme comes into force the erstwhile non-pensioners is expressly made retrospective by the authorities promulgating such scheme; the erstwhile non-pensioner who has retired prior to the advent of such extended pension scheme can claim benefit of such a new extended pension scheme.
If such new scheme is prospective only, old retirees non- pensioners cannot get the benefit of such a scheme even if they survive such new scheme.
They will remain outside its sweep."
10.
On the other hand, In Monotosh Rai's case (supra), the Supreme Court was dealing with a situation where a new pension scheme had been introduced and for the application of the aforesaid new pension scheme, a cut off date had been provided.
In these circumstances, the Supreme Court had held that the cut off date provided for application of the new scheme was justified.
Nakara's case (supra) was distinguished.
It is apparent from perusal of the judgment in Monotosh Rai's case that the aforesaid category would be category II noticed in V Kasturi's judgment.
The petitioners, however, fall in category I After their retirement, they are already getting pensionary benefits.
The only question is of computation and certain others enhanced benefits.
Thus, the petitioners would fall within category I as enumerated in V Kasturi's case and, therefore, as held aforesaid by the Supreme Court, the cut off date was wholly without any justification.
11.
In view of the aforesaid discussion, the present writ petitions are allowed.
The cut off date of April 1, 1995 provided in the communication dated March 8, 1996 (Annexure P/1) is declared to be wholly irrelevant for the purpose of enhanced pensionary benefits payable to the retirees.
Accordingly, it is held that all retirees who are retired/died earlier or after April 1, 1995 would be entitled to the revised pensionary benefits, as per the decision Annexure P/1.
Consequently, the petitioners would be entitled to revised pensionary benefits.
Necessary payment be computed and be paid to the petitioners within a period of four months from the day a certified copy of this order is received.
Petition allowed.