SS Nijjar, J. (Oral) - This judgment will dispose of 7 writ petitions bearing CWP No. 1336 of 1999 (Balwan Singh etc. v. The Chairman, Pepsu Road Transport Corporation, Patiala etc.), CWP No. 1666 of 1999 (Ashok Kumar, etc. v. The Chairman, Pepsu Road Transport Corporation, Patiala, etc.), CWP No. 1667 of 1998 (Gujjar Singh etc. v. The Chairman, Pepsu Road Transport Corporation Patiala, etc.), CWP No. 1794 of 1999 (Baljodh Singh etc. v. The Chairman, Pepsu Road Transport Corporation Patiala, etc.), CWP No. 1935 of 1999 (Kishori Lal, etc. v. The Chairman, Pepsu Road Transport Corporation Patiala, etc.), CWP No. 3384 of 1999 (Rajbinder Singh etc. v. The Chairman, Pepsu Road Transport Corporation Patiala, etc.) and CWP No. 6088 of 1999 (Ved Parkash etc. v. The Chairman, Pepsu Road Transport Corporation Patiala, etc.) as there is commonality of facts and issues of law raised therein.
For facility of reference, the facts are taken from CWP No. 1667 of 1999.
2.
The short question which arises for the consideration of this Court is as to whether the petitioners have been legitimately denied the benefit of the difference between the revised pay scales and the unrevised pay scales from the date of revision of pay scales i.e. 111986 to 31101998 as 1.11.1998 is the date from which the arrears have actually been paid to the petitioners.
All the petitioners are employed with the Pepsu Road Transport Corporation, Patiala (hereinafter referred to as `PRTC') in the workshop category.
The service conditions of the petitioners are governed by the regulations called PRTC Conditions of Appointment and Service Regulations, 1981 (hereinafter referred to as the `1981 Regulations').
Regulations 4 and 14, which define the classification of employees and the pay of the employees, may be reproduced as under :-  "4.
Classification of Employees.
(i) For the purpose of those regulations the employees shall be classified as under :- (a) Class-III xxx xxx xxx (iii) Workshop :- Service Station Incharge, Sectional Officer, Head Mechanic, Head Electrician, Head Blacksmith, Head Carpenter, Mechanist, Mechanic, Fitter, Tyreman, Borer, Welder, Blacksmith, Assistant Tyreman, Carpenter, Upholster, Electrician, Painter, Radiator Repairer, Turner, Vulcaniser, Battery Attendant, Assistant Fitter, Head Mechanic, Tyreman Incharge.
xxx xxx xxx 14.
Initial Pay : The initial pay of the employees shall be fixed in accordance with the provisions of the Punjab Civil Service Rules, Vol. 1, Part 1, which have been adopted as such and made applicable to that extent.
Pay scale shall be on the pattern of the State Government.
Explanation : (a) Pay scales mentioned in the regulation would mean and include ordinary as well as Selection grade as admissible to the counterparts of the workmen employed in the Transport Department of the State Government.
(b) The number of selection grade posts will be determined and the formula, rule or manner for granting the same will be applied on the pattern followed by the State Government with regard to its employees in the Transport Department.
Allowances : The holders of posts shall, in addition to the pay, be entitled to such allowances as may be admissible under the orders of the Corporation, issued from time to time on the pattern of the State Government.
In addition to it, employees shall be entitled to get benefits under various enactments both of State Government and Central Government."
PRTC is controlled and financed by the Punjab Government.
The Chairman and the Managing Director of PRTC are usually nominated by the Government.
There has been parity of pay of the employees working in Punjab Roadways and the PRTC.
3.
The State of Punjab revised the pay scales of its employees with effect from 111986.
These revised scales were also made applicable to workshop category employees in the Punjab Roadways.
Not being satisfied, the employees working in the Punjab Roadways approached the Pay Anomaly Committee.
The recommendations of the Pay Anomaly Committee were accepted by the Government of Punjab.
However, while issuing the notification, the revised pay scales were made effective from 3111989 in stead of 111986.
Relying on the aforesaid decision of the State of Punjab, the pay scales of the petitioners were also revised with effect from 3111989.
An order to this effect was issued by the PRTC on 521993 (Annexure P-3).
4.
Dissatisfied with the aforesaid decision, some of the employees of the workshop category of Punjab Roadways filed Civil Writ Petition No. 15920 of 1995, titled Ram Murti and others v. State of Punjab and others, which was decided on 1321996.
In the aforesaid judgment, it was held as follows :-  "In view of the pleadings of the parties and the settled proposition of law on the basis of the judgments relied upon by the petitioners, the present petition is disposed of with the direction that the petitioners shall be deemed to have been granted the revised pay scales w.e.f.
111986 instead of 3111989.
However, they shall not be paid the arrears of the differences of pay scales, but will be entitled to all other consequential benefits."
5.
Feeling dissatisfied with the decision of PRTC taken vide order Annexure P-3, the petitioners also filed a representation dated 541998.
When the representation did not meet with any success, the petitioners filed CWP No. 13540 of 1998, which was disposed of by this Court on 2781998.
The Chairman of PRTC (respondent No. 1 therein), was directed to deal with the representation and pass appropriate orders as expeditiously as possible and preferably within two months from the date a copy of that order was received by him.
In compliance of the directions issued by this Court, the respondents have passed the order dated 2121998 (Annexure P-7) denying the benefit of arrears of revised pay scales from 111986 to 31101998.
It is this order which has been challenged by the petitioners in these writ petitions, on the ground that they are entitled to the same relief that was granted to the employees of the Punjab Roadways in Ram Murti's case (supra).
The respondents have filed a written statement.
They have stated that the Corporation is not under any obligation to give pay scales or allowances to its employees which are paid to the employees working in the Transport Department of Punjab Roadways.
PRTC Conditions of Appointment & Service Regulations, 1981 are merely standing orders.
These regulations merely provide that the pay scales shall be on the pattern of the State Government.
These regulations do not contemplate that the pay scales of the workshop category of employees of PRTC will be at par with the scales of the workshop category of employees working in the Transport Department, Punjab Government.
It is further pleaded that the observations of the Division Bench in Ram Murti's case (supra) are of no assistance to the petitioners, as the Division Bench has clearly held that the petitioners therein shall not be paid the arrears of difference of pay scales but will be entitled to all other consequential benefits.
The Corporation, keeping in view the judgment of the Division Bench, its financial condition and the delay on the part of the petitioners in approaching the Corporation, has by order dated 2121998 granted the revised pay scales with effect from 111986 in stead of 3111989, but has not allowed the benefit of arrears of pay.
It is specifically pleaded that upto 3131998, the PRTC had accumulated losses of over Rs. 266 crores.
The losses have accumulated due to increase in the costs of inputs and price of diesel, etc.
The revised pay scales have been sanctioned with effect from 111986.
The additional financial burden on account of arrears for the period from 111986 to 31101998 would be about Rs. 12 crores.
The additional liability every year on account of revision of pay, would be Rs. 65 crores.
Hence, the respondents are justified in denying the benefit of arrears from 111986 to 31101998.
6.
Mr. Chhatrath appearing for the petitioners submits that the grounds taken by the respondents for denying the relief to the petitioners, would not be available to a statutory Corporation like the PRTC.
Mr. Chhatrath has also relied on a Division Bench judgment of this Court in the case of Papinder Vir Singh and others v. State of Punjab and others, 2000(2) SCT 957 and the judgment rendered by the Division Bench in the case of Ram Murti and others v. State of Punjab and others, Civil Writ Petition No. 15920 of 1995, decided on 1321996.
He also submitted that the SLP filed against the judgment of this Court in Ram Murti's case (supra) has also been dismissed on 2141997.
The petitioners had made the representation only after the matter was settled by the Supreme Court.
Hence, there is no delay and the respondents cannot deny the relief to the petitioners on the ground of delay.
Learned counsel also relied on the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Kapila Hingorani v. State of Bihar, 2003(3) SCT 679 (SC) : 2003(2) RSJ 42 and in State of Himachal Pradesh v. HP State Recognised & Aided Schools Managing Committees, 1995(3) SCT 648.
7.
Mr. Nehra, however, submits that the judgments relied on by Mr. Chatrath are not applicable in the facts and circumstances of this case.
The judgment in the case of Kapila Hingorani (supra) dealt with non-payment of salary by various Government Companies/Public Sector Undertakings to their employees.
This judgment was not in a case with regard to revision of pay scales.
Similarly, in State of Himachal Pradesh's case (supra), the Supreme Court was considering about the relevance of financial conditions of an educational institution in discharge of its obligation to provide free education to children upto the age of 14 years.
He submits that these judgments dealt with basic fundamental rights, whereas, the present writ petitions concern only the payment of arrears on account of revision of pay scales.
In fact, he submits that not only no fundamental, but no legal right of the petitioners has been infringed.
He also submits that the delay caused by the petitioners in approaching the Corporation is a relevant factor in determining as to what possible relief can be given to the petitioners.
He further submits that the financial condition of the Corporation is not only a relevant but important consideration as to whether any relief can be granted to the petitioners.
The respondents have specifically pleaded the huge losses, which have been incurred by the Corporation already.
Therefore, it would be wholly inequitable to compel the Corporation to pay extra Rs. 12 crores on account of arrears of revision of pay scales.
This benefit was even denied by the Division Bench in Ram Murti's case (supra).
8.
We have considered the submissions made by the learned counsel very anxiously.
It is a matter of record that the pay scales of the employees of the PRTC were revised keeping in view the revision of pay scales of the employees of State of Punjab and also Punjab Roadways.
It is also a matter of record that the pay scales admissible to the employees of PRTC were identical to the pay scales which were enjoyed by the same category in Punjab Roadways.
It is also a matter of record that the employees of the Punjab Roadways have been granted arrears of the revised scales with effect from 3111989, although the pay scales were initially revised with effect from 111986.
The factual position has been noticed by the Division Bench in the case of Papinder Vir Singh (supra) and following the judgment of the earlier Division Bench of this Court in Ram Murti's case (supra), the petitioners therein were granted revised pay scales with effect from 111986 in stead of 3111989.
This relief has already been granted to the petitioners.
However, in view of the judgment in Ram Murti's case (supra), the petitioners would be entitled to the arrears of the difference between the revised and the unrevised pay scales with effect from 3111989 till 31101998.
However, keeping in view the delay caused by the petitioners in approaching the respondents, the actual financial benefits shall be restricted to a period of 3 years and two months prior to the date of submission of representation by the petitioners to the Corporation.
9.
Petitions allowed.
No costs.
Petitions allowed.