SS Nijjar - We have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner at length and perused the paper-book.
2.
In the demand notice dated 2162001, the workman had claimed that he had been working as skilled labourer with the petitioner at a monthly salary of Rs. 1,54860 from 551995 to 251997.
His services have been illegally retrenched by order dated 251997.
The amount of retrenchment compensation amounting to Rs. 2908/- was never paid to him while delivering letter dated 751997.
He, therefore, claims that the retrenchment is in violation of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act.
He also claimed that no seniority list was provided to him at the time of retrenchment.
According to the workman, the petitioner has employed some other workman in his place after his retrenchment.
The Management had admitted that the workman had been retrenched from service after 3041997.
It was denied that the workman was being paid monthly salary of Rs. 154860 per month.
The retrenchment notice was issued to the workman on 251997 and the compensation was paid vide Voucher No. 68 dated 1091997.
It is agreed between the parties before the Labour Court that the compensation amount was paid on 1091997.
That being so, the Labour Court has correctly come to the conclusion that the compensation has been paid in violation of the provisions of Sections 25(F) of the Act.
It is a settled proposition of law that retrenchment compensation has to be paid to the workman as a condition precedent.
Considering the legal position under Section 25-F of the Act, the Supreme Court in the case of Workmen of Subong Tea Estate represented by the Indian Tea Employees Union v. Outgoing Management of Subong Tea Estate and another, AIR 1967 Supreme Court 420, has observed as follows :-  "17.
The true legal position in respect of the industrial law as to retrenchment is not in doubt or in dispute.
Section 25-F of the Act prescribes the conditions precedent to a valid retrenchment of industrial employees.
It provides that no workman employed in any industry who has been in continuous service for not less than one year under an employer shall be retrenched by that employer until one month's notice has been served on him as prescribed by sub-section (a); compensation paid to him as provided for by sub-s. (b) and notice in the prescribed form is served on the appropriate Government as required by sub-s. (c).
In other words, the three conditions prescribed by Cls. (a), (b) and (c) of S 25-F appear prima facie to constitute conditions precedent before an industrial workman can be validly retrenched."
3.
The Supreme Court again considered Section 25(F) in the case of M/s. National Iron and Steel Co Ltd and others v. The State of West Bengal and another, AIR 1967 Supreme Court 1206, and observed as under :-  "(9) The third point raised by the Additional Solicitor General is also not one of substance.
According to him, retrenchment could only be struck down if it was mala fide or if it was shown that there was victimisation of the workman etc.
Learned counsel further argued that the Tribunal had gone wrong in holding that the retrenchment was illegal as Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act had not been complied with.
Under that Section, a workman employed in any industry should not be retrenched until he had been given one month's notice in writing indicating the reasons for retrenchment and the period of notice had expired, or the workmen had been paid in lieu of such notice, wages for the period of the notice.
The notice in this case bears the date November 15, 1958.
It is to the effect that the addressee's services were terminated with effect from the 17th November and that he would get one month's wages in lieu of notice of termination of his service.
The workman was further asked to collect his dues from the cash office on November 20, 1958 or thereafter during the working hours.
Manifestly, S 25-F, had not been complied with under which it was incumbent on the employer to pay the workman, the wages for the period of the notice in lieu of the notice.
That is to say, if he was asked to go forthwith he had to be paid at the time when he was asked to go and could not be asked to collect his dues afterwards.
As there was no compliance with S 25-F, we need not consider the other points raised by the learned counsel........." 4.
As noticed earlier, in the present case, admittedly, the workman had been retrenched by order dated 251997 and he has been paid the retrenchment compensation on 1091997.
Thus the retrenchment is clearly violative of Section 25(f), rendering the same to be void ab initio.
5.
In view of the above we are of the considered opinion that the Labour Court has not committed any error of jurisdiction.
The award also does not suffer from any legal infirmity.
Dismissed.
Petition dismissed.