SS Nijjar, J - We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length and perused the record of the case.
2.
The petitioner holds the degree of Bachelor of Engineering in Electronics & Power Engineering.
On the basis of this qualification, he applied for a post of Assistant Engineer in response to an advertisement Annexure P-3.
The essential qualifications were as follows :-  Essential qualifications :  1.
Assistant Engineer (Electrical) (i) Bachelor of Engineering Degree in Electrical/Electrical and Electronics or equivalent qualifications from any Indian/Foreign University/Institution duly recognised by All India Council of Technical Education with minimum 60% marks (55% marks for SC of Haryana).
(ii) Hindi upto Matric 3.
By letter dated 07042004, the petitioner has been informed that his candidature has been rejected as he does not possess the requisite degree of Bachelor of Engineering (Electrical).
The petitioner was given ten days' time to file a representation.
The petitioner relies on a certificate dated 06.11.1997 issued by the Principal of Shri Ramdeobaba Kamla Nehru Engineering College, Nagpur.
In this certificate, it is stated that in the Nagpur University, the Electrical Engineering Branch is now given the name of Electronics & Power Engineering.
Thus, the Branch of Electronics and Power Engineering is nothing but Electrical Engineering Branch.
It is further stated in the certificate that this College is affiliated to Nagpur University, Nagpur, runs Electronics and Power Engineering Course, recognised by Government of Maharashtra and approved by All India Council of Technical Education.
4.
The respondents have filed a written statement.
It is pleaded that the degree of Electronics and Power Engineering is in a different discipline of Engineering than the Electrical/Electrical and Electronics Engineering and, therefore, the same cannot be treated as equivalent to Electrical/Electrical and Electronics Engineering.
Commenting on the certificate submitted by the petitioner, it is stated that from a perusal of the said certificate it is evident that Electronics and Power Engineering is one of the branches of the Electrical Engineering and not equivalent to the Electrical Engineering.
According to the written statement, another candidate Lalan Kumar, Roll No. 573 had also submitted the same certificate for the same post.
He had also attached a certificate dated 15102001 issued by the Assistant Registrar (Prof.
Exam.
), Nagpur University, Nagpur, Annexure R-1.
According to this certificate.
Electronics and Power Engineering is one of the branches which comes under the Electrical Engineering group as per University Ordinance.
5.
Mr. Godara has vehemently argued that the objection raised by the respondents is hypertechnical.
The petitioner is entitled to be appointed on the basis of the degree aforesaid.
Learned counsel submits that merely because a different nomenclature is used in the degree by the Nagpur University, would not render the petitioner ineligible.
In support of this submission, learned counsel relies on a Division Bench judgment of this Court in the case of Anuj Yadav v. State of Haryana and another, 1995(3) (Vol. 21) Recent Services Judgments 1.
6.
We have perused the aforesaid judgment and find that the same is not applicable to the facts and circumstances of the present case.
The following observations of the Bench would be relevant :-  "2.
We had asked an Advocate of this Court, Mr. Ravi Sodhi, to find out from the Panjab University as to whether the subject "Business Administration and Business Management" are one and the same and are interchangeable.
Shri Ravi Sodhi, after meeting the Vice-Chancellor, Panjab University, "Business Administration" and "Business Management" are used interchangeably by various Universities and there is one paper of "Business Management" offered in B Com.
by the Panjab University.
3.
In view of what has been put on record by Shri Ravi Sodhi, Advocate, after consulting the Panjab University, we are of the view that "Business Administration" and "Business Management" are interchangeable and synonymous.
Some Universities call it "Business Management" and other institutions call it "Business Administration".
Learned counsel for the respondent-Commission states that if that is so, the petitioner would be eligible for consideration for the post of Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer.
Consequently, we allow this writ petition and hold that the petitioner is entitled to be considered as eligible for the post of Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer.
The Commission may now consider his case for appointment as of Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer within two months from today.
The writ petition stands disposed of accordingly".
A perusal of the aforesaid observations clearly indicates that the counsel for the Panjab University had stated that the terms "Business Administration and Business Management" are used interchangeably by various Universities.
This position was accepted by the parties and the writ petition was allowed.
We are unable to discern any legal principle that may have been laid down by the Division Bench in the aforesaid judgment.
7.
On the other hand, Mr. Mehtani, learned counsel appearing for respondent No. 5 has submitted that qualifications possessed by the petitioner have not been recognised as essential qualifications for the post of Assistant Engineer.
It has also not been treated as equivalent to Degree of Bachelor of Engineering.
Learned counsel relies on a Division Bench judgment of this Court rendered in CWP No. 6958 of 2003 (Deepak Garg and others v. State of Haryana and another), on 9102003, wherein a similar degree issued by the Amravati University has been held to be not equivalent to Degree of Bachelor of Engineering in Electronics Engineering/Electronics and Communication Engineering.
In the aforesaid judgment, it has been held that there must be strict compliance with the prescribed qualifications.
After noticing the submissions of the learned counsel, it has been held as follows:-  "After hearing learned counsel for the parties at length and perusal of the pleadings and the record placed on the Court file, we are of the opinion that the petition is not sustainable and the same deserves to be dismissed.
The perusal of the advertisement shows that no scope for applying the rule of equivalence has been provided by the respondents.
It has been clearly and categorically mentioned that the persons who hold/have acquired BE (Electronics/Electronics Communication Engineering or Technology) from a recognised University, shall be eligible to be considered for the post by way of calling them for the interview.
The candid certification of equivalence issued by the respective Universities of the petitioners is of no consequence.
The advertisement categorically provides that a person who holds degree in Electronics Engineering/Electronics and Communication Engineering or Technology from a recognised University, shall be eligible for being considered for the post of Lecturer in Electronics.
There may be some common subjects so far as the aforestated two courses are concerned but that would not make both the degrees falling within the ambit of rule of equivalence.
The petitioners have not been able to spell out that all the subjects in both the degrees are para materia.
Had it been so, there was no reason or requirement to give different labels to different degrees accordingly."
In our opinion, the aforesaid observations are fully applicable to the facts and circumstances of this case.
It is settled proposition of law that once a particular qualification is prescribed, the appointment has to be made strictly in accordance therewith.
This principle of law has been laid down by a Full Bench of this Court in the case of Som Dutt v. State of Haryana and another, 1983(3) S.L.R.
141.
SS Sandhawalia, Chief Justice observes :-  "There appears to be wide variety of reasons for holding that the employer- State, should in law, be entitled to prescribe the qualifications which it may think necessary as tailored to the peculiar needs of the particular post or service.
Generally, it seems somewhat elementary that the employer alone would know what are the specialities and conditions of service or post for which the incumbent is required.
Therefore, it would follow that its discretion in seeking the right man for the right job should be left relatively unfettered.
Consequently, no doctrinaire rule can be laid down that a technically higher education qualification is necessarily better or more advantageous for the peculiar needs of a post for which the employer-State has prescribed lower qualifications.
Once qualifications have been laid down by binding statutory provisions, then the concept of strict compliance therewith would entitle the State to insist that these be meticulously satisfied and extraneous considerations like qualifications other than those prescribed being either the exact equivalents, or technically higher than those, would be irrelevant to the issue and indeed may well be contrary to the statutory prescription.
An enquiry by the Court for determining as to whether a particular qualification is an exact equivalent or is higher or superior to the prescribed one, would open a Pandora's Box on which the lid cannot easily be replaced".
8.
The Supreme Court in the case of The District Collector & Chairman Vizianagaram (Social Welfare Residental School Society), Vizianagaram and anr. v M Tripura Sundari Devi, 1990(4) S.L.R.
237, has held as under :-  "It must further be realised by all concerned that when an advertisement mentions a particular qualification and appointment is made in disregard the same, it is not a matter only between the appointing authority and the appointee concerned.
The aggrieved are all those who had similar or even better qualifications than the appointee or appointees but who had not applied for the post because they did not possess the qualifications mentioned in the advertisement.
It amounts to a fraud on public to appoint person with inferior qualifications in such circumstances unless it is clearly stated that the qualifications are relaxable.
No court should be a party to the perpetuation of the fraudulent practice.
We are afraid that the Tribunal lost sight of this fact".
In view of the above, we are of the considered opinion that the qualifications possessed by the petitioner not being the prescribed qualifications, the respondents have rightly rejected the candidature of the petitioner.
Consequently, we find no merit in the present petition.
Dismissed.
Petition dismissed.