MM Kumar, J - The petitioner, who is an Assistant Superintendent Jails has approached this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India with a prayer for quashing order dated 2161988 (Annexure P.2) to the extent it forfeits the salary for the period he remained out of service and the same is ordered to be treated as leave without pay.
A further prayer for quashing that part of order has also been made by the petitioner whereby it has been directed that his period of suspension from 1391984 to 26.5.1985 would not qualify for payment of full salary except the subsistence allowance which stood paid to him.
The afore-mentioned order was passed by the appellate authority when the petitioner had filed an appeal against the order dated 2751985 inflicting the punishment of dismissal on him.
2.
Brief facts of the case are that the petitioner joined as Assistant Superintendent Jails on 281971 in the respondent-Department.
On 591984, an F.I.R. was lodged by Dr. Kusam Gulyan, wife of Mr. PR Gulyan, Jail Medical Officer alleging misbehaviour with her by the petitioner and also threats by him to kill her.
A case was registered under Section 504/506 IPC against the petitioner at Police Station Ambala City vide F.I.R. No. 367 dated 691984.
After the trial, the petitioner was finally acquitted of the charge on 18121985 (Annexure P.1).
At the same time, the petitioner was placed under suspension on 1391984 and a regular departmental inquiry was held by Shri SN Trikha, Deputy Superintendent, District Jail, Karnal who was the Inquiry Officer.
The petitioner was found guilty of misbehaviour with Dr. Kusam Gulyan and use of abusive language against her.
The inquiry was held in accordance with the rules and ample opportunity of hearing was afforded to the petitioner.
The appointing authority, namely, Director General and Inspector General of Prisons, Haryana (respondent No. 2) on the basis of inquiry report dismissed the petitioner from service with effect from 2751985.
However, on appeal, the appellate authority substantively accepted the appeal of the petitioner and imposed the punishment of censure.
The operative part of the order passed by the appellate authority on 22.6.1988 read as under :-  "Keeping in view the fault on the part of Shri Hira Lal Sharma and the circumstances under which he misbehaved with Mrs. Gulyan, I am of the view that the punishment of dismissal from service is too harsh.
I, therefore, set aside the order of DG Prisons dated 2751985 dismissing Shri Hira Lal from service and order that he be taken back in service with the same rank.
However, for the above lapse in his part, he is awarded the punishment of `Censure'.
It is further ordered that he should not be paid anything for the period he remained out of service and this period will be treated as leave without pay.
Further during the period of suspension from 1391984 to 26.5.1985 nothing will be paid except subsistence allowance already given to him.
I also order that Shri Hira Lal Sharma may be shifted from Central Jail, Ambala and posted elsewhere in Haryana against a vacant post."
3.
In the written statement, the stand of the respondents is that the service record of the petitioner is extremely poor as his integrity has been doubted and he has consistently earned `below average' report.
A number of punishments have been awarded to him on various occasions.
The fact with regard to holding of inquiry and finding the petitioner guilty of the charge by the Inquiry Officer has been accepted.
It has also been asserted that respondent No. 2, the appellate authority had passed the order on 22.6.1988 without fully exonerating the petitioner or concluding that the suspension was wholly unjustified.
4.
Mr. ID Singla, learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that according to Rule 73 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume I (as applicable to the State of Haryana) (for brevity `the Rules') an opportunity to show cause is required to be afforded to a delinquent employee in case he is to be paid less than full pay for the period of suspension or any other allowance.
According to the learned counsel, the rule makes it obligatory for the respondents to issue a show cause notice, grant opportunity of hearing and only then an order confiscating the pay for the period of suspension could be passed.
The learned counsel has placed reliance on a judgment of this Court in case of Om Phal v. State of Haryana and others, 1991(3) SLR 162.
He has also submitted that whenever there is reinstatement and the suspension results into infliction of a minor penalty then in all cases, full salary has to be paid as has been held by this Court in Kulbir Singh v. State of Haryana and others, 1991(1) SCT 412 (P&H) : 1991(1) Recent Services Judgments 511.
5.
Mrs. Mamta Singal, learned State counsel has argued that, in fact, the instant case is governed by Rule 73(1) and not by Rule 73(2) of the Rules.
According to the learned counsel, on an appeal filed by the petitioner, the competent authority has passed the order of censure.
It has also passed order with regard to the period of suspension and pay in respect of the period, the petitioner remained out of service which is consistent with Rule 73(1).
The learned counsel has maintained that the reliance of the petitioner on the judgment of this Court in Om Phal's case (supra) and in Kulbir Singh's case (supra) is absolutely misplaced as those cases have arisen out of the withdrawal of the suspension order and dropping of inquiry.
6.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, I am of the considered view that order dated 22.6.1988 passed by respondent No. 2 does not suffer from any legal infirmity.
In order to appreciate the controversy, it would be necessary to make a reference to Rule 73(1) and (2) of the Rules, which read as under :-  "7.3.
(1) When a Government employee, who has been dismissed, removed, compulsorily retired, or suspended, is reinstated, or would have been reinstated but for his retirement on superannuation the authority competent to order the reinstatement shall consider and make a specific order :- (a) regarding the pay and allowances to be paid to the Government employee for the period of his absence from duty, occasioned by suspension and/or dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement ending with his reinstatement on or the date of his retirement on superannuation as the case may be, and (b) whether or not the said period shall be treated as a period spent on duty.
(2) Where the authority mentioned in sub-rule (1) is of opinion that the Government employee has been fully exonerated or, in the case of suspension, that it was wholly unjustified, the Government employee shall be given the full pay and allowances to which he would have been entitled, had he not been dismissed, removed, compulsorily retired or suspended, as the case may be."
7.
A perusal of Rule 73(1) and (2) of the rules shows that comprehensive guidance has been provided with regard to release of allowances on the reinstatement of an employee.
According to Rule 73(1)(a), when an employee is reinstated in service, who was earlier dismissed, removed, compulsorily retired or suspended, then the competent authority is under obligation to pass a specific order with regard to the pay and allowances to be paid to such an employee for the period of his absence from duty on account of suspension and/or dismissal etc., and whether or not the afore-mentioned period was to be treated as the one spent on duty.
Rule 73(2) postulates two different situations and operates only when an employee has been fully exonerated or in the case of suspension, it has been found that it was wholly unjustified.
In the afore-mentioned two eventualities, the employee becomes entitled to full pay and allowances to which he would have been entitled, had he not been dismissed, removed, compulsory retired or suspended.
8.
In the present case, the petitioner has not been exonerated nor it could be held that the suspension was unjustified.
A perusal of the order shows that appointing authority affirm the findings with regard to the guilt of the petitioner.
However, it found the punishment of dismissal from service as excessive and converted the same to that of `censure'.
As a natural corollary the suspension has to considered as fully justified especially when departmental enquiry was held with the object of inflicting major penalty.
It is, thus, obvious that the case of the petitioner is not covered by Rule 73(2) and the order is fully within the four corners of Rule 73(1).
9.
The judgment of this Court in Om Phal's case (supra) is not applicable to the facts of the present case because in the instant case, a detailed departmental inquiry has been held and the petitioner has been afforded fully opportunity.
On the basis of the inquiry report, the petitioner was dismissed on 2751985.
He was, however, reinstated in service by affirming the findings of the Inquiry Officer, namely, that he misbehaved with Dr. Kusam Gulyan as is evident from the perusal of the order as produced in the paras above.
The appellate authority considered the punishment as too harsh and imposed the punishment of censure.
It also passed specific order with regard to the allowances to be paid to the petitioner on his reinstatement as is contemplated by Rule 73(1).
In Om Phal's case (supra), no inquiry was held and stoppage of increments was imposed and order was also passed to the effect that the petitioner therein was not entitled to anything more than the subsistence allowance during the period of suspension.
It was on those facts that this Court held that the issuance of a show cause notice was a must.
The judgment of this Court in Om Phal's case (supra) is based on the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of BD Gupta v. State of Haryana, 1972 S.L.R.
845.
In that case also a show cause notice for inflicting minor punishment was issued to the delinquent employee.
Finding his explanation as unsatisfactory, punishment was imposed by further holding that no pay in respect of suspension period is to be paid except the subsistence allowance already paid.
It was in these circumstances, their Lordships of the Supreme Court held that Rule 73 of the Rules would be applicable and an opportunity to show cause with regard to the treatment of suspension period was required to be given.
However, in the case of present nature, where a detailed departmental enquiry has been held and full opportunity has been given, the ratio of the judgment in Om Phal's case (supra) would not be applicable.
Similar is the position with regard to the other judgment in Kulbir Singh's case (supra).
For the reasons stated above, this petition fails and the same is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.