SS Nijjar, J. (Oral) - In this writ petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner prays for the issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari quashing the promotion of respondent Nos. 3 to 7 on the post of Assistant Engineers.
The petitioner also prays for the issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 to consider and promote the petitioner as Assistant Engineer on regular basis with effect from the date the vacancy arose on the said post.
2.
Briefly, the relevant facts for the decision of the writ petition are that the petitioner joined respondent No. 1 - Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh (hereinafter referred to as "The PGI") as Sectional Officer on ad hoc basis on 2.6.1981.
He was appointed as Junior Engineer (Civil) on regular basis on 141983.
He was confirmed on the (post) of Junior Engineer (Civil) on 141988.
He was given an appreciation letter on 2461995 (Annexure P-5) by the Director of the P.G.I.
The petitioner had ignored the call for strike and attended to his duties.
The Director has noticed that the work of PGI was greatly impaired by the strike from 231994 to 19/2031994 and again from 28.3.1994 to 8.4.1994.
It is noticed that the strike was an inhuman decision which caused untold sufferings to serious patients and the general public.
The petitioner is stated to have attended to his duties devotedly and rendered yeoman service for maintaining the essential services in the Hospital and the Institute during the period of strike.
He is said to have showed a deep sense of responsibility and loyalty.
Thus, the letter of appreciation has been placed on the personal file of the service record of the petitioner.
3.
On 2491997, on the basis of the recommendations of the Departmental Promotion committee, all eligible Junior Engineers who had completed five years of service were given upgraded scale.
A vacancy of S.D.O.
had arisen in June, 1998.
On the basis of his record, the petitioner was given current duty charge of the post of S.D.O.
with immediate effect by order dated 1061998 (Annexure P-6).
In the seniority list of Junior Engineers of the P.G.I., the name of the petitioner stands at Sr. No. 1.
Respondent Nos. 3 to 7 are shown junior to the petitioner, having been placed at Sr. Nos. 2 to 6 of the seniority list.
However, the petitioner was conveyed some adverse remarks by letter dated 13112000.
The petitioner submitted a representation against the adverse remarks.
By letter dated 19.11.2001 (Annexure P-8), the petitioner was informed that the remarks were advisory in nature and for improvement in his technical knowledge.
The remarks were expunged.
By letter dated 19102002 (Annexure P-9), adverse remarks were again conveyed to the petitioner.
The petitioner submitted a representation (Annexure P-10) against the adverse remarks on 3122002.
The representation of the petitioner has not been considered till date.
The petitioner has been relieved from the post of Assistant Engineer (Civil) on his transfer to Construction Division, by order dated 11102002.
According to the petitioner, promotions to the posts of Assistant Engineer are governed by statutory rules which are as under :-  "Post Qualifications Experience Technologist Grade-I/Assistant Engineer B.E.
degree from a recognised University or equivalent in the respective branch From amongst Technologist Grade-II having 8 years experience in the respective field.
OR 3 years Diploma in respective branch from a recognised Institute with 8 years experience in the line.
OR,  Junior Engineer, who while in service has passed Sections "A" & "B" of AMIE examination."
4.
Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 have filed the written statement.
The facts as pleaded by the petitioner in the writ petition have not been controverted.
It has, however, been stated that the petitioner was given the higher pay scale on completion of 15 years of service.
It is also stated that appreciation letters were issued to all the employees who had not participated in the strike.
It is admitted that the petitioner was given Current Duty Charge on the post of Assistant Engineer on 1061998.
It is also admitted that the petitioner is senior to respondent Nos. 3 to 7.
It is also admitted that the adverse remarks in the ACR for the year 1999-2000 were expunged.
It is also accepted that the representation made by the petitioner against the adverse remarks contained in the ACR for the year 2001-2002 is still under process.
It is, however, stated that the petitioner has not been promoted to the post of Assistant Engineer (Civil), even though his case was considered by the Departmental Promotion Committee.
His name was not recommended by the Departmental Promotion Committee.
The petitioner has already been reverted by order dated 27102003.
The Current Duty Charge was withdrawn as the petitioner was not for fit for regular promotion to the post of Assistant Engineer.
The petitioner was not found suitable for promotion as he was not able to reach the required "Benchmark".
It is further pleaded by the respondents-PGI that Ministry of Health and Welfare Government of India have issued instructions for proposal of Cadre Review of all the categories in the Engineering staff.
According to these instructions, the benefit of cadre structure is to be given with effect from 131992, without giving notional benefit.
The case of the petitioner for promotion was considered in the light of these new rules.
He was not promoted as the DPC did not find the petitioner suitable.
The petitioner was, therefore, ordered to be reverted by withdrawing the current duty charge w.e.f.
27102003.
The relevant part of the instructions, on the basis of which the case of the petitioner was considered and rejected, has been reproduced by the respondent-PGI in paragraph 9 of the written statement which are as under :-  "Bench Mark, Grading and Preparation of Select List.
Category of Officers Benchmark Grading to be given by DPC Preparation of select list Selection 1.
For all Group "C" : Group "B" and Group "A" posts below the level of Rs. 12,000-16,500/- (including promotions from lower Groups to Group "A" Posts/grades/services Good Fit/Unfit Those who are graded as "fit" shall be included in the select panel in order of their inter-se seniority in the feeder grade subject to availability of vacancies.
2.
For all Group "A" posts of the level of Rs. 12,000-16,5000 and above.
Very Good - do - When sufficient number of Officers with the required Benchmark/Grade is not available, those to the extent available will be placed on the panel.
For the unfilled vacancies, fresh DPC should be held for considering the required number of officers beyond the original zone.
Where the "Benchmark" is "Good", the DPC may assess the suitability of employees in the zone of consideration upto a number which is considered sufficient against the number of vacancies, and need not consider the remaining employees in the zone of consideration."
It is, therefore, the emphatic case of the respondents-PGI that the petitioner was not ignored on account of adverse remarks.
The respondents-PGI further stated that the rule reproduced by the petitioner for promotion has been changed in response to the proposal of Cadre Review as mentioned above.
It is, however, mentioned that the proposal is to be implemented after the approval of the competent authorities of the Institution i.e. Governing Body and Institute Body.
According to the respondents-PGI, the recruitment rule after 131992 will be as under :-  "Whether Selection or non-selection post and method of recruitment For Promotion/Deputation Selection post 100% by promotion 100% by promotion from JEs/Technologist Cd.
II having 8 years experience in the grade and possessing minimum 3 years diploma in the respective branch of Engineering."
5.
Giving the vacancy position, the respondents-PGI have categorically stated that in the year 1997, four posts became vacant in the direct recruitment quota out of which two were in regular Division and two posts were vacant in the Construction Division.
The vacancies were filled by giving Current Duty Charge to Suresh Kumar and Kishori Lal, Junior Engineers (Civil), RC Sharma, Technologist Grade II (Civil) and the petitioner.
Thereafter the Departmental Promotion Committee was constituted in the year 2001 for regular post.
RC Sharma being the senior-most was promoted out of 50% promotion quota.
Even at that time, the case of the petitioner was considered, but it was rejected as his integrity was found "doubtful" and because he did not match the "Benchmark" of "Good" in ACR.
As far as respondent No. 7 - Prem Chander is concerned, his name was considered.
He was found eligible to be promoted, but his orders have been placed under sealed cover in accordance with the government instructions.
6.
The petitioner has filed replication.
It is reiterated that all adverse remarks have been expunged by the competent authority by letter dated 19.11.2001.
It is emphatically stated that the remarks for the so-called "doubtful integrity" have never been communicated to the petitioner till date.
The claim of the petitioner was not considered at the relevant time.
It is pleaded that one Arun Vohra was promoted by order dated 5121997 (Annexure P-18) and RC Tuli was promoted w.e.f.
2691997 by order dated 5121997.
One AK Gaur who was holding the post of Assistant Engineer, expired on 1561998.
Therefore, vacancies were clearly available against which the name of the petitioner could have been considered.
Even now the name of the petitioner ought to have been considered for promotion against the vacancies which arose in the year 1997-98, on the basis of the record available at that time.
It is also submitted that the rules which have not been approved till date cannot be made applicable for denying the claim of the petitioner.
He is entitled to be promoted on the basis of seniority-cum-merit.
7.
On the basis of these pleadings, learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that the name of the petitioner was never considered in the year 1997- 1998.
Even the respondents-PGI had admitted that four posts were available in the year 1997.
The petitioner was said to have been ignored by the DPC which was constituted in the year 2001 on the ground that his integrity has been found "doubtful".
The Benchmark of "Good/Very Good" has not been approved till date by the appropriate authority, and therefore, the petitioner is entitled to be promoted, on the basis of seniority-cum-merit.
Even according to the respondents-PGI, the adverse remarks for the year 1999-2000 have been expunged.
Representation against the ACRs for the year 2001-2002 is still pending.
The petitioner was entitled to be considered on the basis of the record as it existed at the time when the vacancy had arisen in the year 1997-1998.
In support of this submission, the learned counsel has relied on the judgments of the Supreme Court in the cases of BV Sivaiah and others etc. v. K Addanki Babu and others etc., 1998(4) SCT 46 (SC) : 1998(5) SLR 59 and Gurdial Singh Fijji v. The State of Punjab and others, 1979(1) SLR (SC) 804.
Learned counsel has also relied on a Division Bench judgment of this Court in the case of Er.
Kulbir Singh Executive Engineer, PWD and others v. The State of Punjab, 2001(1) SCT 615 (P&H) : 2001(5) SLR 565.
8.
In the case of Kulbir Singh (supra), the Division Bench of this Court has observed as under :-  "7.
It is settled proposition of law that the rules or instructions controlling the promotion in service are to be given effect to prospectively.
The amended instructions would be applicable to the vacancies which became available to the department on and after such amendment in the instructions was carried out.
The old existing vacancies will have to be filled in accordance with the earlier instructions specially when appointment and promotion to other cadres were made on the basis of the old instructions.
A Division Bench of this Court in the case of Guneeta Chadha and others v. Union of India and others, 2001(1) SCT 1026 (P&H) : 2000(1) SLR 9 while dealing with a somewhat similar subject held as under :- "After hearing learned counsel for the petitioners we are of the view that merely because process of selection and recruitment in case of Lecturers mentioned in Annexure P-7 and Madhurima Sharma had started prior to February 21, 1991 (the date of promulgation of 1990 Rules), according to us, would not make any difference.
The appointments in both the cases were made after the promulgation of the Rules.
In our view, the sine qua non is the date of vacancy.
As per the judgments of the Apex Court referred to in appoint No. (i), the posts which were vacant prior to the amendment of the rules have to be filled by the unamended Rules.
In these circumstances as to when did the process of recruitment start pales into insignificance."
The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the case of YV Rangaiah and others v. J Sreenivasa Rao and others, AIR 1983 SC 852 : 1983(1) SLR 789 (SC) held as under :-  "The vacancies which occurred prior to the amended rules would be governed by the old rules and not by the amended rules.
It is admitted by counsel for both the parties that henceforth promotion to the post of Sub-Registrar Grade-II will be according to the new rules on the zonal basis and not on the State- wise basis and, therefore, there was no question of challenging the new rules.
But the question is of filling the vacancies that occurred prior to the amended rules.
We have not the slightest doubt that the post which fell vacant prior to the amended rules would be governed by the old rules and not by the new rules........... 8.
The Government had issued the letter dated 19.7.2001, keeping the instructions of 29122000 in abeyance.
The authority of the Government to amend its earlier instructions can hardly be challenged.
The competent authority could or could not have issued such instructions, need not be gone into by us in this petition as it is neither necessary nor called for.
The promotion of the petitioners and all other eligible candidates to the post of Superintending Engineer has to be as per the vacant positions existing prior to 19.7.2001 till which date the instructions/policy dated 29122000 was in force.
Admittedly, by vacancies were available and no D.P.C.
was constituted for finalising the promotions to the post of Superintending Engineer.
The case of the petitioners would be squarely covered by the judgments afore-referred.
The eligible candidates have a legitimate expectancy for promotion to the higher posts in accordance with the service rules/instructions in force at the relevant time.
Depriving of such right to the eligible persons by the respondents is certainly unjust and unfair."
In the present case also, the rules relied upon by the respondents-PGI have not been approved till date.
The petitioner was, therefore, entitled to be considered on the basis of the earlier unamended rule.
He could not have been ignored on the ground that he has not reached the Benchmark of "Good".
In the written statement, the respondents-PGI have categorically admitted that the instructions issued by the Government of India are yet to be approved by the Governing Body of the PGI.
Unless the aforesaid regulations are approved, the same could not have been made applicable for rejecting the claim of the petitioner for promotion.
Under the old rules, the petitioner would be entitled to be considered for promotion on the basis of seniority-cum-merit.
It is accepted by the respondents-PGI that the petitioner was senior-most among the candidates to be considered.
However, he was not considered for reasons best known to the respondents-PGI.
The petitioner could not have been ignored for promotion merely because persons junior to him had better merit.
In such circumstances, juniors cannot be permitted to steal a march over the senior person unless the senior lacks the essential qualifications or is otherwise found "unfit".
In the present case, the respondents-PGI have not pointed out any material to show that the petitioner was ineligible to be considered for promotion at the relevant time.
In the case of BV Sivaiah (supra), the Supreme Court has observed as under :-  "10.
On the other hand, as between the two principles of seniority and merit, the criterion of "seniority-cum-merit" lays greater emphasis on seniority.
In State of Mysore and another v. Syed Mahmood and others, 1968(3) SCR 363 : 1968 SLR 333 (SC), while considering Rule 4(3)(b) of the Mysore State Civil Services General Recruitment Rules, 1957 which required promotion to be made by selection on the basis of seniority-cum-merit, this Court has observed that the rule required promotion to be made by selection on the basis of "seniority subject to the fitness of the candidate to discharge the duties of the post from among persons eligible for promotion."
These observations are squarely applicable to the facts and circumstances of the present case.
The petitioner was entitled to be considered for promotion at the time when the vacancy arose in the year 1997-1998.
Although the respondents-PGI have stated in the written statement that the claim of the petitioner was not ignored on the basis of adverse remarks, yet it has been argued by the learned counsel for the respondents-PGI that the petitioner was ignored because there was an entry of "Integrity Doubtful".
Having perused the record, we are of the considered opinion that the argument of the learned counsel for the respondents-PGI is not well-founded.
In the latest report in the year 2002, there are general remarks to the effect that the petitioner shirks responsibility, but there is no remark on the record indicating that his integrity has been found to be doubtful.
In any event, the petitioner has made a representation against the so-called adverse remarks which is admittedly pending.
Therefore, the alleged adverse remarks could not have been taken into consideration to deny the promotion to the petitioner.
It is a settled proposition of law that un-communicated adverse entries cannot be taken into consideration, especially if a representation is pending against the same.
9.
In the case of Gurdial Singh Fijji (supra), the Supreme Court has observed as under :-  "16.
The principle is well-settled that in accordance with the rules of natural justice, an adverse report in a confidential roll cannot be acted upon to deny promotional opportunities unless it is communicated to the person concerned so that he has an opportunity to improve his work and conduct or to explain the circumstances leading to the report.
Such an opportunity is not an empty formality, its object, partially, being to enable the superior authorities to decide on a consideration of the explanation offered by the person concerned, whether the adverse report is justified.
Unfortunately, for one reason or another, not arising out of any fault on the part of the appellant, though the adverse report was communicated to him, the Government has not been able to consider his explanation and decide whether the report was justified.
In these circumstances, it is difficult to support the non- issuance of the integrity certificate to the appellant.
The chain of reaction began with the adverse report and the infirmity in the link of causation is that no one has yet decided whether that report was justified.
We cannot speculate, in the absence of a proper pleading, whether the appellant was not found suitable otherwise, that is to say, for reasons other than those connected with the non-issuance of an integrity certificate to him."
Keeping the aforesaid observations in view, we are of the considered opinion that the petitioner has been wrongly not considered for promotion at the time when persons junior to him were considered on the basis of seniority-cum- merit.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed and the respondents-PGI are directed to re-consider the claim of the petitioner for promotion to the post of Assistant Engineer, from the date when the vacancy arose, on the criteria of "seniority-cum-merit".
Let the case of the petitioner be considered within a period of three months of the receipt of a certified copy of this order.
No costs.
Petition allowed.