Surya Kant, J - This case has a chequered history of a few rounds of litigation in the past which has failed to yield peace and harmony in the conventional dispute of inter-se seniority despite the litigants having reached at the fag end of their careers.
Petitioners herein have now approached this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India for issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus to command the Punjab State Electricity Board (here-in-after referred to as the Board) to consider and promote them as Senior Executive Engineers with all consequential benefits from the date, Respondent No. 2 (Shri Daljit Singh Arora), who is alleged to be their junior, was promoted.
Alternatively, the Petitioners have also sought a writ in the nature of certiorari for quashing the order dated March 31, 2000 (Annexure P-6).
2.
Shorn of the details, the Petitioners and Respondent No. 2 initially joined the Board as Line Superintendents; The Petitioners were senior to Respondent No. 2 in the afore-mentioned Cadre; The recruitment to the post of Assistant Engineer from the post of Line Superintendent (re-designated as Junior Engineer-II) is governed by the Punjab State Electricity Board Service of Engineers (Electrical) Regulations, 1965 (here-in-after referred to as the Regulations); According to Regulation 97, 10% of the cadre posts of Assistant Engineers are reserved for departmental employees (Technical, Subordinate and Drawing Staff) who, during the period of their service, have cleared Sections A and B of AMIE examination or obtained Bachelor's degree in Electrical Engineering provided that they have put in at least 5 years of service.
Regulation 99. provides that 5% of the posts of Assistant Engineers are reserved for promotion from amongst the Graduates/Post Graduates in Engineering who are working as subordinates in the Board with a minimum experience of 3 years; Respondent No. 2 along with S/Shri Gurcharan Singh Raikhi and Gurmeet Singh (both have since expired) qualified the AMIE examination while in service of the Board, therefore, they became eligible and could be considered for promotion under Regulation 97 only; however, their cases were erroneously considered under Regulation 99 and they were promoted as Assistant Engineers vide an order dated August 23, 1978 (Annexure P-1); the afore-mentioned mistake having come to the notice of the Board, Respondent No. 2 and his associates were served with a show cause notice on December 2, 1978 (Annexure P-2) as to why they be not reverted from the post of Assistant Engineers; Respondent No. 2 along with his associates challenged the show cause notice in this Court through C.W.P.
No. 5073 of 1978; while the afore- mentioned writ petition was pending for hearing, another C.W.P.
No. 4182 of 1978 was filed by some other Engineers in which vires of Regulation 97 were challenged; both the writ petitions came up for hearing before a learned Single Judge of this Court; While C.W.P.
No. 5073 of 1978 filed by Respondent No. 2 and his associates was disposed of vide order dated February 5, 1986 (Annexure P-3) on the statement made on behalf of the Board that final decision pursuant to the show cause notice would be take afer hearing Respondent No. 2 his associates and other officials who were likely to be affected; the other Writ Petition namely C.W.P.
No. 4182 of 1978 was also finally decided by this Court after sometime wherein vires of Regulation 97 was upheld but the issue regarding legality of promotion granted to Respondent No. 2 and his associates was not adjudicated upon.
This judgment is reported as Joginder Singh and others v. Punjab State Electricity Board and others, 1986(1) SLR 692.
3.
Accordingly, after hearing Respondent No. 2 and other affected persons, the Board passed an order dated November 16, 1987 (Annexure P-4) whereby it held that Respondent No. 2 and his colleagues were erroneously promoted under Regulation 99. vide order dated August 23, 1978 (Annexure P-1) as their case ought to have been considered under Regulation 97.
Respondent No. 2 and his associates, however, were not reverted from the post of Assistant Engineers because on reconsideration of their cases under Regulation 97, they were found eligible for promotion w.e.f.
March 30, 1983.
Consequently, their dates of promotion were postponed from August 23, 1978 to March 30, 1983 and they were also placed below the present Petitioners in the seniority of Assistant Engineers.
Aggrieved by the order dated November 16, 1987 (Annexure P-4), Respondent No. 2 and his two associates again approached this Court in C.W.P.
No. 8903 of 1987 which came up for hearing on November 27, 1987.
The motion Bench while issuing notice of motion, further directed that "reversion is stayed till further orders."
During the pendency of the afore-mentioned Writ Petition, the Board vide an order dated March 31, 2000 (Annexure P-6) further promoted Respondent No. 2 as Senior Executive Engineer on the premise that by virtue of the ad-interim order dated November 27, 1987 staying reversion referred to above, Respondent No. 2 continued to be senior to the Petitioners, notwithstanding the fact that operation of order dated November 16, 1987 (Annexure P-4) was not stayed by this Court.
Aggrieved by this promotion of Respondent No. 2 as Senior Executive Engineer, the Petitioners have approached this Court through the present Writ Petition.
4.
At the outset, it needs to be brought on record that during the pendency of this writ petition, Petitioners No. 2 and 3 as well as the sole private Respondent No. 2 have retired from service on attaining the age of superannuation.
Petitioner No. 1 is also due for retirement on March 31, 2004.
5.
At this stage, it will be apposite to reproduce Regulations 97 ad 99, which reads as under :-  "97 : 10% of the cadre posts of Assistant Engineers Class II shall be reserved for Departmental employees (Technical Subordinates and Drawing Staff) who during the period of their service cleared Sections (A) and (B) of AMIE examination or obtained Degree in Electrical Engineering provided they have put in a minimum of 5 years service in all (instead of six years now obtainable).
This shall take effect from 20th August, 1971.
Note : Persons promoted against the above reservation will remain on probation for a period of one year in the promoted rank.
99 : 5% of the posts of Assistant Engineers Class II Electrical/Mechanical may be reserved for promotion from amongst the graduates/post graduates in Engineering working as subordinates in the Board with a minimum experience of three years in the Punjab State Electricity Board."
6.
I have heard Shri Rajiv Atma Ram, learned Senior counsel assisted by Ms. Madhu Dayal, Advocate, for the Petitioners, Shri Sukhbir Singh Mattewal, learned counsel for the Board and Shri Govind Goel, Advocate for Respondent No. 2 and have perused the record.
7.
Shri Rajiv Atma Ram, learned senior counsel for the Petitioners has contended that the Board, on reconsideration of the case of erroneous promotion granted to Respondent No. 2 and his associates, itself has found, as a matter of fact, that the claim of Respondent No. 2 for promotion as Assistant Engineer ought to have been considered under Regulation 97 and not under Regulation 99. in-as-much as Respondent No. 2 as well as his two associates admittedly obtained the AMIE degree while in service of the Board and they were not graduates or Post Graduates at the time of entry into service of the Board.
They could, thus, be considered for promotion under Regulation 97 only and that the only contention raised by Respondents No. 2 before the Board was that he had completed AMIE degree while being on leave from the Board and as such was not "in the service of the Board at the relevant time," therefore, his promotion under Regulation 99 was fully justified.
However, even while on sanctioned leave, contends Shri Atma Ram, the relationship of master and servant does not cease to exist, therefore, the plea taken by Respondent No. 2 was legally misconceived and the same was rightly repelled vide order dated November 16, 1987 (Annexure P-4).
He further contended that Respondent No. 2 having been held junior to the Petitioners, they had a preferential right of being considered for further promotion as Senior Executive Engineers as, according to Regulation 12 of the Regulations, appointment by promotion is required to be made on the basis of seniority-cum-merit, therefore, action of the Board in not considering them for promotion while promoting Respondent No. 2 as Senior Executive Engineer vide the impugned order dated March 31, 2000 (Annexure P-6) was patently illegal and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
8.
S/Shri S.S. Mattewal and Govind Goel have, however, contended that since this Court vide interim order dated November 27, 1987 passed in C.W.P.
No. 8903 of 1987 had stayed reversion of Respondent No. 2, the order dated November 16, 1987 (Annexure P-4) was not rightly given effect to by the Board and as such Respondent No. 2 continued to be senior to the Petitioners in view of his earlier promotion as Assistant Engineer vide order dated August 23, 1978 (Annexure P-1).
9.
Having heard learned counsel for the parties, I find that the Writ Petition deserves to succeed.
There can hardly be any dispute that the members of the Technical Subordinate and Drawing Staff, which includes Junior Engineers-II who cleared AMIE degree or obtained degree in Electrical Engineering while in service of the Board were entitled to be considered for promotion against 10% cadre posts of Assistant Engineers subject to the condition of completion of five years service under Regulation 97.
Undisputedly, Respondent No. 2 and his two associates completed AMIE degree while they were in service of the Board.
Thus, their case of promotion could be considered under Regulation 97 only.
So far as Regulation 99 is concerned, it reserves 5% of the posts of Assistant Engineers for promotion from amongst the Graduates/Post Graduate Engineers working as subordinates in the Board who entered the service of the Board with the afore-mentioned qualification.
Respondent No. 2 and his two associates do not fall in the said category, therefore, their cases for promotion could not have been considered under Regulation 99.
In my view, the contention of Respondent No. 2 and his associates in response to the show cause notice (Annexure P-2) that they were not in the service of the Board when they cleared AMIE degree as they were on leave, was legally misconceived and was rightly rejected by the Board.
The relationship of employer and employee never came to an end while they proceeded on sanctioned leave.
The dates of their promotions were, therefore, rightly postponed from August 23, 1978 to March 30, 1983 vide order dated November 16, 1987 (Annexure P-4).
No fault, thus, can be found with the afore-mentioned order.
Since this Court never stayed operation of the order dated November 16, 1987 (Annexure P-4) in C.W.P.
No. 8903 of 1987, in my considered view, the same remained operative inter-se between the parties and as a necessary corollary thereof, the Petitioners regained their seniority over and above Respondent No. 2 in the cadre of Assistant Engineers.
The Petitioners, therefore, had a preferential and superior right to be considered for promotion as Senior Executive Engineers over and above Respondent No. 2 in view of Regulation 12 which provides that all promotions shall be made on seniority-cum-merit basis.
However, during the pendency of the Writ Petition, Respondent No. 2 has retired from service on attaining the age of superannuation, therefore, I do not deem it proper to quash his promotion at this stage and am rather of the view that the ends of justice would be sufficiently met by giving an appropriate direction to the Board to consider the case of the Petitioners for promotion as Senior Executive Engineers with effect from March 31, 2000, i.e., the date when their junior Respondent No. 2 was promoted and in case they are found suitable on the criterian of seniority-cum-merit, they shall be promoted as such with all consequential benefits including arrears of pay and/or refixation of post retiral benefits.
The needful shall be done within a period of three months from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order.
The Writ Petition is accordingly allowed.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.