Gyan Sudha Misra, J - This petition was filed for a review of the order passed by this Court on 17121996 in S.B.C.
Writ Petition No. 1053A/94 M/s. Rastradoot, Jaipur v. Union of India and Anr. whereby the writ petition preferred by the petitioner M/s. Rastradoot Jaipur was dismissed holding therein that the Employees Provident Fund and Misc.
Provisions Act 1952 (the Act of 1952 for short) was not applicable on the petitioner-organisation which is a newspaper establishment having a printing press.
The petitioner had further challenged the levy of penalty on delayed payment of the Provident Fund contribution by the employer with the RPF Commissioner.
2.
After considering several authorities mentioned in the impugned order, the objection of the petitioner that the aforesaid Act is not applicable on the petitioner-Newspaper, was rejected in view of the ratio of the Apex Court judgment reported in delivered in the matter of Organic Chemical Industry v. Union of India, (AIR 1979 Supreme Court 1803), wherein it has been held that the power conferred under Section 14-B of the Act of 1952 to levy damages on employer defaulting in payment of contribution towards the provident fund was not arbitrary or unguided and hence the provision regarding levy of penalty was not held to be violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
3.
Hence, it was held that the EPF Act of 1952 was applicable and the penalty also could be imposed on the employer in case the amount was not deposited within the time prescribed.
The levy of penalty therefore to the extent of Rs. 85,115/- was treated as justified and hence the petitioner was directed to deposit the entire amount by way of penalty except 25% of that amount which he had already deposited.
4.
The petitioner thereafter filed this review petition initially on the ground that the petitioner being a newspaper establishment with a printing press, it would be covered under the Working Journalists Act 1955 and it is not under any liability to deposit the contribution towards provident fund under the Employees Provident Fund Act, 1952.
However, it could not be disputed that this provision is applicable on the Newspaper-establishments for the last 29 years including the petitioner-Newspaper establishment and hence, I do not deem it appropriate to views this position in this petition.
Now the only controversy is whether 100% penalty could have been levied by the respondents on the petitioner establishment on account of late payment of the provident fund contribution.
5.
Challenging the levy of penalty, learned counsel for the petitioner Mr. Kala has relied upon a judgment of the Supreme Court reported in the matter of K Street Lite Corporation v. Regional Provident Fund Commissioner, 2001(2) SCT 734 (SC) : (2001(4) SCC 449), wherein also the question cropped up as to whether 100% penalty could be levied for late payment of provident fund contribution.
The learned Judges of the Apex Court were of the view that levy of 100% penalty on account of default was not justified but instead of remanding the matter on account of pendency of the matter for a long time, thought it fit to confine the amount of damages of 25% only.
In the instant matter too a similar situation arises where the amount by way of penalty which was Rs. 85,115/- has been calculated at the rate of 100% out of which 25% of the amount has already been deposited by the petitioner as per direction of this Court which was issued at the time of admission of the writ petition.
It thus emerges that the petitioner has already deposited 25% of the amount in question by way of penalty and that is purely in consonance with the view taken by the Supreme Court in its judgment referred to hereinbefore.
6.
The end result of the situation is that earlier direction of this Court to the petitioner in the impugned order to deposit 100% penalty is fit to be recalled and modified to the extent that the petitioner who has deposited 25% of the amount in question by way of penalty due to late payment deposit of EPF contribution should be treated as sufficient amount towards penalty and no amount beyond this is required to be deposited by the petitioner.
This review petition is allowed to the aforesaid extent and stands disposed of.
Revision allowed.