JS Narang, J - It has been alleged that the petitioner-workman had been appointed as a Clerk by respondent No. 1.
It had been provided that the appointment would be subject to approval of Punjab Mandi Board.
It has been further averred that the petitioner came into service of the Market Committee Tarn Taran, as a Clerk from October 10, 1991 uptil July 14, 1992.
Her services were terminated on the ground that the resolution passed by the Market Committee i.e. respondent No. 1 had not been approved by the Punjab Mandi Board.
A demand notice dated 25111992, was served by the workman upon the management, which was contested and that the Competent Authority referred the dispute for adjudication to the Labour Court, Amritsar.
2.
The petitioner filed claims statement before the Labour Court which was contested by way of written statement by the Market Committee.
Upon the pleadings of the parties the issues had been framed and that the parties led oral as well as documentary evidence accordingly.
3.
The stand of the management is that no relationship of "employer and employee" exists as the petitioner had obtained job with the Punjab State Electricity Board, as such, the reference had become infructuous.
Apart from this, the plea of limitation has been taken and it has been claimed that the claim is barred by time.
It has also been pleaded that the fresh appointments have been banned by Govt. of Punjab and Punjab Mandi Board but despite this, Resolution No. 9 dated November 4, 1991, had been passed by the Market Committee appointing the petitioner as Record-cum-Store Keeper subject to approval of Mandi Board.
In fact, the case of the petitioner had been sent for approval of the Mandi Board which was declined vide order No. 1076 dated 3181992.
It has been pleaded that no letter of appointment had been issued and, therefore, no joining report could be submitted by the petitioner.
However she has been marking her presence illegally in the attendance register showing her presence on certain dates and resultantly she even marked herself present on certain holidays.
In fact, she had not been given any wages and in respect of the said claim she had filed an application under Section 33-C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as "the Act").
However, the said application has been withdrawn without waiting for the verdict thereon.
4.
The pivotal question which was required to be determined between the parties is as to whether the relationship of "employer and employee" came into existence between the parties.
In this regard, pointed reference has been made to the statement of the petitioner wherein she has admitted that she had never submitted any joining report in the office of the management and in fact no letter of appointment had ever been issued to her.
Thus, the two ingredients for establishing the relationship of employee and employer have not been established.
Thus, upon these factually admitted premises, the petitioner cannot be termed to claim herself to be an employee of the management.
However, the resolution dated November 4, 1991 Ex. M1/1, shows that the letter of appointment was to be issued only after approval of her appointment is received from the Punjab Mandi Board.
It shall be apposite to notice the excerpt (true translation) of the aforesaid exhibit and the decision therein which reads as under :-  Office of Market Committee, Copy of the Meeting dated November 4, 1991, Resolution No. 9. xxx xx xxx  "Approved.
The post of Record/Store Keeper has fallen vacant and that upon this post Smt. Santosh Kumari wife of Shri Pardeep Kumar, village Pandori Gola, qualification (B.A) is appointed on daily wages.
The case for approval of the Mandi Board be sent.
The letter of appointment be issued only after the approval is received."
The perusal of the aforestated document shows that the letter of appointment was to be issued after the approval of the Mandi Board had been received.
The fact of the matter is that no approval had been granted by the Mandi Board in view of the ban ordered by the Government of Punjab.
It may be noticed that the petitioner was to be appointed in place of Shri Nirvair Singh who was to be promoted as Auction Recorder and that in his case also the approval had not been received, as such, the post never fell vacant against which the petitioner was proposed to be appointed.
Thus, it cannot be said that she was deemed to have been appointed in pursuant to the resolution passed by the Market Committee.
In any case, the admitted fact is that no letter of appointment had been issued to the petitioner.
A categoric finding has been returned by the Labour Court in this regard and that the persual of the statement of the petitioner also shows that she had never ever received the letter of appointment nor she had given the joining report.
Thus, the question of violation of Section 25-F of the Act, did not arise.
It looks that she was allowed to mark herself present in connivance with the staff of the Market Committee but there is no evidence that she had been performing the duties upon the post of Store-cum-Record Keeper.
It is not discernible how her presence could be shown when the aforestated post did not fall vacant as the promotion/appointment of the incumbent had also not been approved by the Mandi Board.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has not been able to address any meaningful argument to demolish the finding of facts returned by the Labour Court in respect of the relationship of employer and the employee coming into existence accordingly.
It has been contended that obtainment of approval by the appointing authority is a matter which would come under the precincts of indoor management and that the workman was not involved or concerned with the same accordingly.
Once the fact has been established that by virtue of the resolution the workman had been appointed and that she had been attending the office and her presence had been recorded in the attendance register, it cannot be said that the petitioner had not joined the duty and did not perform the job.
6.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents has argued that the perusal of the resolution categorically shows that the petitioner was to be issued the letter of appointment after the approval had been received from the Mandi Board.
It is an admitted fact that the approval had not been granted and in fact the request of the Market Committee in pursuant to the resolution had been categorically rejected.
Coupled with another fact i.e. the rejection of approval of promotion/appointment of Nirvair Singh the incumbent upon the post on which petitioner had been approved to be appointed, it cannot be accepted that the post had fallen vacant and she could assume the duty against the said post.
It is not discernible as to how she got herself marked present but this document alone would not establish the right of the petitioner as she cannot be termed as a workman and resultantly the relationship of employer and employee never came into existence.
Thus, the Labour Court has correctly answered the reference against the workman and in favour of the management.
He categorically pointed out the admission made by the workman to the effect that she had never submitted any joining report in the office of the management and further no letter of appointment was ever issued to her by the management.
In view of the categoric admission on the part of the workman, the finding of the Labour Court cannot be vitiated.
7.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and perusal of the pleadings and so also the record received from the Labour Court we are of the considered opinion that there is no merit in the petition and that the award of the Labour Court dated July 19, 2001, deserves to be upheld.
8.
The perusal of the resolution shows that the letter of appointment was to be issued only after the approval had been received from the Mandi Board and further post could have fallen vacant if Nirvair Singh, the incumbent had been promoted accordingly.
In his case, the resolution passed for promoting him to the post of Auction Recorder has also not been approved by the Mandi Board, resultantly, he continued to occupy the post as such, the petitioner could not have shown her presence in the attendance register againt the said post.
The factum of her presence claimed on the basis of the attendance register has been rightly and correctly rejected by the Labour Court as the principal fact of issuance of letter of appointment and joining the post has not been proved.
Moreso, in view of the admission of the petitioner that no such letter had been issued and that she had not submitted any joining report, the question of relationship of employer and employee coming into existence did not arise.
In view of the above, we find no merit in the petition and the same is dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.