GS Singhvi, J - This petition is directed against the order dated 5.1.2001 passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal, Chandigarh Bench (for short, the Tribunal) dismissing the application filed by the petitioner for quashing the termination of his service from the post of Substitute Khalasi.
2.
The facts necessary for deciding the writ petition are that after having passed diploma in welding, the petitioner joined one year's apprenticeship at Railway Workshop, Jagadhri in 1992.
At the end of the training, he was awarded National Apprenticeship Certificate and his name was included at Sr. No. 77 in the list of successful candidates maintained by the concerned authority.
In 1998, the Production Engineer, Northern Railway, Jagadhri Workshop (respondent No. 3) issued notification for recruitment of 40 Substitute Khalasis with a clear stipulation that 19% of the posts were reserved for Scheduled Castes, 4% for Scheduled Tribes and 27% for Other Backward Classes (for short, OBCs).
The last date fixed for receipt of the applications was 2831998.
In pursuance of that notification, the petitioner submitted an application for recruitment as Substitute Khalasi.
Along with the application, he submitted Backward Class Certificate dated 1271995 issued by the Sub Divisional Officer (Civil), Jagadhri (Yamuna Nagar).
After expiry of the last date, he submitted certificate dated 641998 issued by the Sub Divisional Officer (Civil), Jagadhri showing him as a member of OBC.
By an order dated 251998 issued by the Senior Personnel Officer, Jagadhri Workshop, he was appointed as Substitute Khalasi in the pay scale of Rs. 2550-3200 against one of the vacancies earmarked for OBC.
After some time, a complaint was received by the administration that the OBC certificate produced by the petitioner was not genuine.
The concerned authority got conducted a vigilance enquiry in which it was confirmed that the certificate of the petitioner was not genuine.
Thereafter, respondent No. 3 issued notice dated 1981999 to the petitioner proposing termination of his service on the ground that the certificate produced by him was not as per rules and the Central Government's list of OBCs.
This is borne out from the following extracts of the show cause notice :  "Your appointment as Sub-Khalasi Grade Rs. 2550-3200 w.e.f.
2598 was subject to the verification of caste certificate produced by you at the time of recruitment.
On investigation, it has been found that OBC certificate produced by you with your application for recruitment as Sub Khalasi is not authentic and valid caste certificate as enshrined in the Extra Ordinary Gazette of India.
As such your candidature and appointment on the basis of OBC certificate is found not as per rules and as per Central Government list of OBCs.
Accordingly, it has been tentatively decided to terminate your services as Sub.
Khalalsi in terms of instructions contained in PS No. 10798.
You are, therefore, called upon through this notice to show cause as to why your services should not be terminated in view of facts narrated above.
Your representation, if any, should reach the undersigned within 10 days of the receipt of this notice and final orders shall be passed."
3.
In his reply, the petitioner controverted the allegation that he did not belong to OBC and the certificate produced by him was not genuine.
After considering the same, respondent No. 3 passed order dated 14101999 terminating his service on the ground that the OBC certificate produced by him was not valid.
A copy of that order was served upon him on 20.10.1999.
4.
In the meanwhile, the petitioner filed an application under Section 19(1) of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 (for short, the Act) seeking a declaration that being a member of OBC, he was entitled to be appointed against one of the posts reserved for that category.
He also prayed that the concerned authority may be restrained from terminating his service or in the alternative, it may be directed to consider him for appointment as general category candidate.
5.
In response to the notice issued by the Tribunal, respondents No. 1 to 3 filed written statement, the salient features of which were :  (a) Out of 40 vacancies of Substitute Khalasis notified on 431998, 19% were reserved for Scheduled Castes, 4% for Scheduled Tribes and 27% for other Backward Classes.
(b) 262 applications were received in response to the notice dated 431998.
(c) The applications of those who had applied for selection as Backward Class candidates were rejected because there was no reservation for Backward Class.
(d) The selection was made keeping in view the instructions issued by the General Manager (Personnel), Northern Railway vide his circulars dated 24121997 and 2311998 for implementation of the directions given by the Supreme Court in UP State Road Transport Corporation v. UP Parivahan Nigam Shikshak Berojgar Sangh, 1995(2) SCT 367 (SC) : 1995(2) SCC 1 and order passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal, Allahabad in C.P. No. 13 of 1995 (OA No. 1677 of 1992) Santosh Kumar and others v. LK Sinha, GM, Northern Railway and others.
(e) The applicant (Petitioner herein) was considered against the posts earmarked for OBCs.
(f) Out of 40 candidates selected for appointment against the advertised posts, 23 were from old panel of apprentices and the remaining 17 were from the list which included the name of the applicant.
(g) Appointments of the applicant and others were subject to verification of the castes certificates and in view of the adverse vigilance report, order terminating his service was passed after giving him show cause notice.
6.
After filing of the written statement, the petitioner filed two miscellaneous applications which were registered as MA No. 1198 of 1999 and MA No. 714 of 2000.
In one of these applications, he prayed for grant of leave to amend the petition by raising the plea that the general category candidates having lower merit were appointed by the General Manager, Northern Railway, New Delhi vide orders dated 18121998, 2621999, 651999 and 14.5.1999 ignoring his candidature and in this manner, his fundamental right to equality had been violated.
In the second application, he sought leave of the Tribunal for placing on record additional information about the number of vacancies of Substitute Khalasis in Jagadhri, Kalka, Jodhpur, Charbagh and Alambagh Workshops and a copy of the circular letter dated 27.1.1998 issued by the Chief Works Manager, Northern Railway, Charbagh Lucknow and Jagadhri.
7.
Respondents No. 1 to 3 filed reply to the miscellaneous applications, in which it was averred that separate selections had been made for recruitment of Substitute Khalasis at Jagadhri Workshop and Delhi and as the petitioner did not apply for appointment in Delhi Division, he does not have the right to seek appointment on the ground that persons with lower merit were appointed in that division.
8.
After considering the averments made in the application, the written statement and the miscellaneous application filed by the petitioner and hearing the counsel for the parties, the Tribunal dismissed the application with the following observations :  "At this point learned counsel for the applicant very strenuously argued that once applicant had produced the Certificate (Annexure A-2), issued by the competent authority that his Caste was included in the category of OBCs, till such a certificate is cancelled, the respondent department could not take any action against him on the presumption that the certificate is false.
Reliance has been placed on the case of R Nandkumar v. Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Ltd, Madras, 2000(2) SCT 493 (Madras) : 2000(2) ATJ 367.
We have considered this contention carefully.
We are not concerned with the cancellation of the Certificate (Annexure A-2).
What was being considered in the judgment, cited above, was that if cancellation of the certificate issued by an authority regarding the caste status is involved, that certificate would continue to be valid till it is cancelled by the said authority or by his superior authority.
It was further held that it would be binding on Public Sector Undertaking, Statutory and Semi-Govt.
Bodies and Voluntary Agencies receiving grant-in-aid from the Central Govt. till it is cancelled.
If, however, a party comes to a Court of law and the question posed before the Court is as to whether a particular caste is included in the OBCs lists issued by the Central Govt., the Court is free to come to its own conclusions, based on the evidence brought before it.
The certificate issued by the SDO will not bind the Court of Law if it is proved to its satisfaction that a particular caste is not included in the list of OBCs, issued by the Central Govt.
If the contention were to be accepted, the Courts would be rendered helpless and will be compelled to accept wrong assertions by the interested parties regarding their castes when, in fact, that particular caste had never been included in the OBCs.
The contention of the applicant, thus, has to be rejected.
He has failed to prove to the satisfaction of this Court that the caste Charj to which he belongs was included in any of the four resolutions which find mention in Annexure A-2 or it finds inclusion in any of the lists for OBCs issued by the Central Govt. xxx xxx xxx From the facts, mentioned above, it is obvious that applicant was selected and appointed in recognition of the fact that he is from OBCs and was, thus, given the benefit of reservation.
It is not his case that he would have found place on the panel of selected candidates from the general category.
Once the claim of the applicant of reservation was found to be false, the respondents were at liberty to cancel appointment given to him straightway even without following the principles of natural justice.
In his case that would have also been in accordance with the terms and conditions of his appointment which are mentioned under Note 2 in Annexure A-5, clearly stating that his appointment is provisional and subject to the caste certificate being verified through proper channels.
It has been mentioned that if the claim of a candidate of belonging to OBC/SC/ST is found to be false, services of such candidate will be terminated forthwith without assigning any further reasons.
Yet, the respondents had issued a show cause notice to the applicant which is Annexure A-6.
After examining his reply, Annexure A-7, respondents had passed order dated 20.10.1999 to terminate his services.
Since his claim for declaration of belonging to OBCs has been found to be not made out, no fault can be found with the order, Annexure R-3.
The claim of the applicant that he has not played a fraud and had genuinely believed that his caste is a Backward Class under the Central List as he was issued certificates, Annexures A-1 and A-2.
In these circumstances, it is argued on behalf of the applicant that a lenient view be taken.
It is further argued that a humanitarian view is required to be taken particularly for the reason that persons who were junior to him in the common merit list, Annexure A-4, of apprentices, have obtained employment under the Railways.
One can go alongwith the applicant on this aspect but still cannot ignore the fact that he would not have found place on the panel of selected candidates had he not been accepted to be belonging to OBCs.
His appointment, thus, was illegal ab initio.
Persons from Annexure A-4 below him had applied for subsequent selections and if any one of them has been selected, that cannot be made a ground for a grievance as the applicant has been enjoying the benefits of his present service for quite some time and after coming to the Court, under interim orders of this Bench.
Legally, no benefit can be given to him as claimed by him.
xxx xxxx xxx The request of the applicant that he is ready to be adjusted anywhere, is an aspect which only the respondent department can consider.
Considering his seniority in Annexure A-4 and the fact that he himself may not be a party to play a fraud with the respondents, we desire that, in case the applicant files a representation or applies for a post meant for apprentices and if he is otherwise eligible, the respondents may consider his request for such adjustment honouring his placement on Annexure A-4."
9.
Shri RK Sharma made strenuous efforts to convince us that the findings recorded by the Tribunal on the issue of validity and genuineness of the OBC certificate produced by the petitioner is perverse and, therefore, the impugned order be declared illegal and a direction may be issued to the official respondents to reinstate him in service with all consequential benefits.
Learned counsel argued that without getting a declaration from the competent Court that the OBC certificate dated 641998 issued by the Sub Divisional Officer (Civil), Jagadhri was invalid the official respondents could not have terminated the petitioner's service by assuming that the same was not genuine.
Shri Sharma further argued that even if the view taken by the Tribunal on the petitioner's ineligibility to be considered for appointment as a candidate of Other Backward Class, the Court may direct respondents No. 1 to 3 to appoint him against general category vacancy because candidates having lower merit have already been appointed in Delhi Division.
10.
We have given serious thought to the arguments of the learned counsel, but have not felt impressed and are of the view that the writ petition is liable to be dismissed summarily.
At the hearing, we enquired from the learned counsel whether there is any notified list of OBCs for the State of Haryana.
In reply, Shri Sharma candidly conceded that there is no OBC in the State of Haryana.
In view of this, we have no hesitation to record our agreement with the Tribunal that the Sub-Divisional Magistrate, Jagadhri was not competent to issue the certificate of OBC to the petitioner entitling him to be considered for appointment against the posts reserved for OBCs.
As a logical corollary to this conclusion, it must be held that the selection of the petitioner for appointment as Substitute Khalasis against the vacancy reserved for OBC was void ab-initio and respondent No. 3 did not commit any illegality by terminating his service after issuing show cause notice.
11.
The petitioner's claim for appointment against general category posts has been rejected by the Tribunal on the ground that none of the candidates of that category appointed in Jagadhri Workshop was lower in merit than him and further that he (petitioner herein) did not have the locus standi to seek appointment in Delhi Division.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has not been able to draw our attention to any rule or instructions under which the petitioner can change his category and claim consideration for appointment as a general category candidate.
He also could not draw our attention to any rule or order under which a common select list is required to be prepared for appointment of Substitute Khalasis in different workshops/divisions.
Therefore, there is no valid ground to entertain the petitioner's plea for appointment against the posts earmarked for general category candidates.
No other point has been argued.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed