Sunil Kumar Garg, J - This writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India has been filed by the petitioners on 30.3.1999 against the respondents with the prayer that by an appropriate writ, order or direction, the respondents be directed to provide appointments to the petitioners on the post of Physical Teacher Gr.
in pursuance of advertisement Annex.1 dated 11th Sept 1998 as per their stand in the merit against the existent vacancies before expiry of the date of filling up the vacancies or in the alternative, the appointments given to the persons through order Annex.4 dated 2121999 be declared illegal and discriminatory and the same be quashed and set aside.
The case of the petitioners as put forward by them in this writ petition is as follows :-  The case of the petitioners is that through advertisement Annex.1 dated 1191998, the respondent invited applications for recruitment on the post of Physical Teacher Gr.
III and since the petitioners were having all requisite qualifications, therefore, they applied for the said post.
According to the petitioners, the respondents had initially advertised only 8 vacancies and in pursuance of the advertisement Annex.1, a tentative merit list Annex2 was prepared and objections were invited from the persons, who were in the merit list prepared by the Department.
Thereafter, after receiving the objections with regard to inclusion of names in the merit list, a final merit list Annex.3 dated 15121998 was prepared by the respondents and in that merit list Annex.3, 164 persons were included.
The further case of the petitioners is that though as per advertisement Annex.1, 8 vacancies were advertised, but since more vacancies were available, therefore, merit list of 164 candidates were prepared through Annex.3 and as many as 41 candidates were given appointment as Physical Teacher Gr.
III through order Annex.4 dated 2121999.
The further case of the petitioners is that 4 candidates, whose names were not found in the appointment order Annex.4 dated 2121999, filed a civil suit before the Munsiff Court, Bikaner and by the order of Civil Court, appointments were given to these four persons, namely Girdharidan, Devendra Kumar, Ram Kishan and Yugal Narain through Annex.R/1, Annex.R/2, Annex.R/3 and Annex.R/4 respectively  The further case of the petitioners is that the life of the aforesaid merit list was to expire on 31.3.1999.
The further case of the petitioners is that the recruitment on the post of Physical Teacher Gr.
III was conducted under the Rajasthan Educational Subordinate Service Rules, 1971 (hereinafter referred to as "the Rules of 1971").
In this petition, the following submissions were raised by the petitioners :-  (i) That through advertisement Annex.1 dated 1191998, when 8 vacancies of Physical Teacher Gr.
III were advertised and merit list of 164 candidates was prepared through Annex.3, giving of appointments to only 41 candidates through order Annex.4 dated 2121999 was against the object of the Act of 1971 and furthermore, when more vacancies were available, the other persons mentioned in the merit list Annex.3 should have also been given appointments and by not giving appointment to them, their rights have been infringed.
(ii) That four persons, who were given appointments through Annex.R/1, Annex.R/2, Annex.R/3 and Annex.R/4 in pursuance of order of civil Court, were less meritorious than the petitioners and their names have been shown much below the petitioners in the merit list and therefore, since appointments were given to them, therefore, a right has accrued in favour of the petitioners to seek appointment.
(iii) That since only 8 vacancies were advertised through advertisement Annex.1, therefore, giving of appointments to 41 candidates through Annex.4 dated 2121999 is wholly illegal and thus, all appointments made through order Annex.4 dated 2121999 should be quashed and set aside.
Hence, this writ petition with the prayers as stated above.
A reply to the writ petition was filed by the respondents and their case is as follows :-  (i) That the relief that all appointments, which were made through order Annex.4 dated 2121999, be declared illegal and be quashed and set aside, cannot be granted to the petitioners unless and until the persons, who were given appointments through order Annex.4 dated 2121999, were made party and since they have not been made party, therefore, such relief cannot be granted to the petitioners.
(ii) That the employer reserves a right to increase or decrease the number of vacancies and no doubt 8 were earlier advertised, but thereafter, some more vacancies were available and meritorious candidates were available to the respondents, therefore, in these circumstances, if appointments to 46 candidates were given through order Annex.4, no illegality or irregularity has been committed by the respondents in doing so.
(iii) That so far as the argument that the persons lower in merit than the petitioners had been given appointments is concerned, it has been submitted by the respondents that these appointments were given through Annex.R/1, Annex.R/2, Annex.R/3 and Annex.R/4 as per the orders of the Civil Court and therefore, no legal right has accrued in favour of the petitioners.
Furthermore, it has been clarified by the respondents that except four persons, who were given appointments through Annex.R/1, Annex.R/2, Annex.R/3 and Annex.R/4 as per orders of civil court, no other persons less meritorious than the petitioners were given appointment.
Hence, the writ petition filed by the petitioners be dismissed.
3.
I have heard the learned counsel appearing for the petitioners and the learned counsel appearing for the respondents and gone through the materials available on record.
4.
So far as the argument that against the 8 vacancies advertised, 46 persons were given appointments through order Annex.4 dated 2121999 is concerned, in my considered opinion, this aspect should not be allowed to be challenged in this petition unless and until 46 persons, who were given appointments through order Annex.4 dated 2121999 were made party and since, they were not party, therefore, this argument carries no weight and stands rejected.
5.
So far as the argument that since many vacancies were available when the appointments to 46 candidates were given through order Annex.4 dated 2121999 and since the names of the petitioners were found in the merit list, therefore, they should also have been given appointments is concerned, in my considered opinion, this argument cannot be accepted because of the following reasons, especially when the life of the panel and already expired :-  (i) That the Hon'ble Supreme Court in State of UP and ors. v. Harish Chandra and ors. (AIR 1996 SC 2173 : 1996(2) SCT 712 (SC)) has observed that candidates seeking appointment after expiry of period of select list had no right.
(ii) That in J. Ashok Kumar v. State of AP and ors. ((1996) 3 SCC 320 : 1996(3) SCT 856 (SC)), the Hon'ble Supreme Court observed that selection having already been over and the selected candidates having been appointed, no relief could be granted to the rest candidates.
(iii) That it is now well settled by series of decisions of the Hon'ble Supreme Court that the empanelment of the candidate in the select list confers no right on the candidates to appointment on account of being so empenelled.
(iv) That mere recommendations of the Public Service Commission forwarding the list of selected candidates or by issuing the list of selected candidates does not accrue a right to a selected candidate for appointment.
It is at the discretion of the State Government to decide the number of vacancies to the filled.
Selection, if made, for the vacancies likely to occur does not create any legal claim of the petitioners.
Mere inclusion of name in the select list does not confer any right on the candidates for appointment.
Thus, since the life of the merit list had already expired, therefore, the petitioners had no right whatsoever to seek appointment.
Mere inclusion of names of the petitioners in the merit list does not confer any right for appointment.
6.
So far as the argument that persons less meritorious than the petitioners have been given appointments through Annex.R/1, Annex.R/2, Annex.R/3 and Annex.R/4 is concerned, the reply of the respondents is very much clear that appointments to the persons through Annex.R/1, Annex.R/2, Annex.R/3 and Annex.R/4 were given as per the orders of the Civil Court and when this being the position, no legal right has accrued in favour of the petitioners and thus, this argument stands rejected.
7.
During the course of arguments, the learned counsel for the petitioners had tried to develop a case that apart from those persons who were given appointments through Annex.R/1 to Annex.R/4 some other persons less meritorious than the petitioners have been given appointments.
In my considered opinion, this arguments cannot bee allowed to be raised because of the simple reasons that this point has not been raised by the petitioner in the petition and apart from this, there is a categorical reply of the respondents that except four persons, who were given appointments through Annex.R/1 to Annex.R/4, no other person less meritorious than the petitioners was given appointment.
If any person less meritorious than the petitioner was given appointment except those four persons, the petitioners could have taken this plea by filing rejoinder and since no rejoinder was filed, therefore, the case of the petitioners that some other persons less meritorious than the petitioners were given appointment, cannot be accepted.
8.
For the reasons stated above, there is no merit in this merit petition and the same deserves to be dismissed.
Accordingly, this writ petition filed by the petitioners is dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.