Swatanter Kumar, J - The petitioners joined as daily wagers with the Chief Conservator of Forests, Haryana, Chandigarh in June, 1988.
On 111995 services of the petitioners were terminated, who, in turn, raised an industrial dispute.
The appropriate Government referred the matter to the Labour Court, Gurgaon, under Section 10(c) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
On 1971996, a settlement was arrived at between the management and the workmen.
The workmen were granted benefit of service but no back wages.
On 731996, State of Haryana formulated and declared its policy of regularisation, which was amended by another notification dated 1831996.
A daily rated person or a casual employee who had completed three years of service and were satisfying other service conditions of regularisation, services of those employees were supposed to be regularised.
On 561997 the petitioners represented to the respondents to regularise their services.
They filed CWP No. 10340 on 2271997, on which a Division Bench of this Court directed the respondents to consider the claim of the petitioners for regularisation.
The said claim was not settled and the petitioners served a notice through their counsel on 3102001 claiming the same relief.
Vide reply dated 1522002, Annexure P/9 to the writ petition, the claim of the petitioners was rejected by the respondents resulting in filing of the present writ petition.
2.
Upon notice, the respondents filed written statement stating that the petitioners were only daily rated casual labours and are not engaged in any post, so they are not entitled for any regularisation.
It is also pleaded that they do not fulfil the stipulated conditions for raising the claim for regularisation of services and as such they cannot be granted any relief.
The advantage of the policy for regularisation can be given only if a regular post exists.
The representation of the petitioners has been rightly rejected by the respondents and they pray that the writ petition be dismissed.
3.
During the course of arguments, learned counsel for the respondents also raised a plea that the petitioners are seasonal workers in the Forest Department and as such no benefit of the policy can be given to them.
4.
We have already noticed that in the award passed by the Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Gurgaon, dated 1971996, which was based on the settlement between the parties, the following direction was passed :-  "Parties have settled the dispute.
Sh. Soma Shekhar, D.F.O.
Mahendergarh, had made a statement that they were ready to take the workman back on duty with continuity of service, without back wages and that seniority list would be prepared within 15 days and the workman shall be appointed within the month of July 1996 in accordance with his seniority.
Workman has accepted the terms and conditions of the settlement today.
In view of the statements made by the parties, the reference is disposed of with the direction to the management that the petitioner be taken back on duty with continuity of service but without back wages in the month of July, 1996."
5.
This settlement was never questioned by any of the parties to the lis and it attained finality.
In fact it was also implemented and the petitioners were taken back on duty with continuity of service.
The request of the petitioners for regularisation was rejected by the concerned authorities.
The claim of the petitioners for regularisation was rejected by the respondents vide Annexure R/5 annexed to the reply, which is turn, relies upon a general order issued by the Chief Conservator of Forests where claim of such other similarly situated persons was rejected for the reason that neither there is availability of work for all nor the posts are vacant in the cadre.
It was also stated that the applicants do not fulfil the conditions of the regularisation policy.
6.
We must notice that none of these contentions were raised before the Labour Court and the award has been passed in favour of the workmen based on settlement as back as on 1971976 and the said award has been implemented.
The petitioners are in service.
Once continuity of service is granted to the workmen and the award attained finality, the obvious conclusion thereof is that they are in service unless some other action is taken in accordance with law.
The plea that they are casual workers is hardly available to the respondents at this stage now and even in the written statement nowhere a specific plea in that behalf has been raised.
It is also not stated what conditions the petitioners do not satisfy to substantiate their claim for regularisation.
The non-availability of posts would not be a ground per se for rejecting the claim of the petitioners because particularly when the work is available and the petitioners are continuously (sic) since 1996.
7.
Different Benches of this Court have consistently taken this view and reference can be made in this regard to the judgments in the cases of Roop Lal v. Punjab State, 2003(1) SLR 656; Vijay Kumar v. State of Punjab, 2001(2) SCT 732 (P&H) : 2002(1) PLR 387, and Ms. Maninder Kaur v. State of Punjab, 2003(3) SCT 655.
The petitioners also reply upon a Division Bench judgment of this Court in the case Sohan Lal v. State of Haryana, CWP No. 15071 of 1995, decided on 4121996 wherein relief was granted to the petitioner in that case in somewhat similar circumstances.
Continuity of service is an expression which must be construed and read appropriately in favour of continuity without exception.
In the award it is nowhere stated that the continuity of service would be restricted in any manner, whatsoever.
The conditions as stipulated in the policy require that the petitioners should have served for a period of three years which apparently the petitioners have.
8.
In the circumstances afore-stated, we allow this writ petition, quash the order dated 1522002, Annexure P/9 to the writ petition and direct the respondents to consider the case of the petitioners for regularisation of their services with consequential benefits, subject to the plea of limitation and in accordance with law expeditiously.
However, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.