Swatanter Kumar, J - Petitioner Surjit Kaur has approached this Court under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India praying for issuance of a writ in the nature of Certiorari, quashing Annexure P/14, memo dated 1822002, issued by the Director General of Police, Punjab, vide which the petitioner was transferred to District Ferozepur in the general lines.
The petitioner is a lady constable working in the Punjab Police.
In the year 1996, she was posted in Accounts Branch of the executive cadre and has got 50 commendation certificates.
Since that year, she has been working sincerely in that post and that on 10.9.1997 she was duly approved by DIG, Ferozepur Range, to be considered for permanent absorption in that cadre.
She was again approved for the same cadre on 1422000.
The recommendation reads as under :-  "Lady Const.
Surjit Kaur No. 933/FZR is hereby approved as Extra hand in Executive Clerical Cadre Account Branch from the date she was earlier working as Extra hand on extreme compassionate grounds."
2.
The case of the petitioner for acceptance and absorption in that cadre was duly approved by the respondents vide their letter dated 2412001.
The petitioner earlier had filed a writ petition in this Court being CWP No. 2001, which was disposed of by the Court vide its order dated 28.11.2001 and a direction was issued to the Director General of Police to pass appropriate orders within one month.
After receipt of the order of the Court, the Director General has passed the impugned order dated 1822002/22.2.2002.
3.
The facts are not much in controversy.
The basic case of the respondents is that the petitioner was an extra-hand and was not a member of the executive clerk cadre and as such can be transferred any-where in accordance with the rules governing the conditions of service of the petitioner.
It is stated that the petitioner was deputed for VIP duty on 912002, but she did not report for her duty, nor she attended the office on that date.
In fact she took leave intentionally to avoid executing the orders passed by the competent authority.
The petitioner has subsequently been transferred to Amritsar.
According to the respondents, the writ petition has become infructuous.
She was given direction to appear before the Medical Board, but she has not appeared.
4.
The main question that falls for consideration of the Court is whether the order of transfer tantamounts to changing of the cadre of the petitioner.
Learned counsel for the petitioner contended that the petitioner was member of the executive clerk cadre and she had been duly approved for confirmation in the said cadre.
As such, she cannot be transferred outside her cadre, without her consent.
On the other hand, learned counsel appearing for the State argued that she was never permanently absorbed and was working only as an extra-hand in that cadre and as such she has got no right to remain in that cadre and she can be sent to lines.
5.
There is no doubt that the petitioner was working as an extra-hand in Executive Clerical Cadre and recommendations had been made for her due absorption in that cadre by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Ferozepur Range, vide letter dated 14022000, on compassionate grounds.
Her application for permanent absorption and change of her cadre as executive clerk, was also forwarded by the concerned authorities.
In these circumstances, after the service of more that seven years if she is sent to lines, apparently it would amount to change of cadre.
In fact, learned counsel for the State did not even seriously dispute that the order of transfer tantamounts to change of cadre, though he strenuously emphasized that the conduct of the petitioner was very irresponsible.
She did not report for VIP duty and the authorities had specifically noticed that she is capable of making reckless allegations against her seniors.
In fact even in the impugned order, the authorities had noticed such facts.
6.
As far as the plea of change of cadre is concerned, the case of the petitioner is squarely covered by the judgments of different Division Benches of this Courts.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has relied upon the observations of the Court reported in the case of Ranjit Singh v. State of Punjab, 2003(1) SCT 777 as well as the other Division Bench judgment of this Court in the case of Constable Bhupinder Kaur v. The State of Punjab, Civil Writ Petition No. 9552 of 1999, decided on 2792001.
In these cases, the Court took the view that a person cannot be transferred from executive clerk cadre to executive cadre without the employee's consent, as they are different cadres.
In the case of Ranjit Singh (supra) as well as in the case of Bhupinder Kaur (supra), where the facts were somewhat similar and the person was an extra-hand in the executive clerk cadre, the Court held as under :-  "We have thoughtfully considered the arguments raised by the learned counsel for the parties and are of the view that the writ petition deserves to succeed.
A perusal of memo dated 29101990 (Annexure R-III) would reveal that approval to the amendment in Rule 1.1 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 was accorded by the State Government on 15.6.1990 and Executive Clerical Cadre i.e. uniformed clerical functionaries posted in various subordinate offices were expected to be a separate cadre than the Women Police Wing.
Admittedly, the petitioner has been working as Typist or AP Clerk since 1993 which is a duty to be discharged by a member of Executive Clerical Cadre.
On the basis of memo dated 29101990, options were obtained and she preferred to continue in the existing cadre vide her option letter dated 18121998.
The Deputy Inspector General, Faridkot Range, Faridkot, accepted her request vide order dated 921999.
Once the petitioner had exercised option, the Senior Superintendent of Police recommended her option and the Deputy Inspector General of Police had accepted that option by passing an order on 921999, the transfer of the petitioner under ipse dixit of the Deputy Inspector General of Police in pursuance to a letter issued by the Director General of Police dated 1.3.1999 is not justified.
In these circumstances, the order of transfer of the petitioner dated 11.3.1999, Annexure P.8, being an order of inter cadre transfer cannot be sustained unless the consent of the petitioner was obtained."
7.
In view of the above discussion, with respect, we follow the view expressed supra and quash the order of transfer of the petitioner.
This judgment would no way hinder or obstruct if the respondents wish to pass any order in regard to her permanent absorption in the executive clerk cadre in accordance with rules and from taking any action, which they wish to view of the above averments and, of course in accordance with law.
The petition is allowed to the above extent, leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.