Satish Kumar Mittal, J - In this petition, the petitioner has impugned the order dated 131985 (Annexure P-1), vide which payment of the arrears of pay of the petitioner has been restricted to a maximum period of 37 months while creating a temporary post of Superintendent Grade-III for him with effect from 3121974 to 20.11.1983.
The petitioner has also prayed for issuance of a direction to the respondents to pay the arrears of pay to him with effect from 3121974 to 21111980.
2.
The case of the petitioner is that he was working as an Assistant in the office of Commissioner, Ferozepur Division, Ferozepur for a number of years.
A temporary post of Superintendent Grade-III was created in the aforesaid office in the year 1974 and the petitioner was allowed to work on that post.
However, he was being paid the salary of the post of Assistant on the plea that the appropriate sanction to the said post has not been accorded by the Government.
The petitioner worked and performed the duties of Superintendent Grade-III from 3121974 to 20.11.1983.
When the petitioner made several representations, the Government of Punjab ultimately accorded sanction for creation of the aforesaid post vide its letter dated 131985.
According to the said letter, the sanction was accorded to the creation of a temporary post of Superintendent Grade-III for the petitioner from 3121974 to 20.11.1983.
However, while creating the said sanction, a condition was imposed that the payment of arrears of pay to the petitioner should be restricted to a maximum period of 37 months.
3.
The grouse of the petitioner is that the aforesaid condition was wrongly imposed and there was no basis for imposing such condition.
Actually, the petitioner was promoted from Assistant to Superintendent Grande-III in the year 1974 and the day he was promoted and discharging the duties of the said post, he was entitled for the payment of salary for the post of Superintendent Grade-III.
But he was denied the payment of salary of the post of Superintendent Grade-III and was only being paid the salary of the post of Assistant on the plea that the Government has not accorded sanction to the creation of the temporary post of Superintendent Grade-III.
The contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the petitioner was not at fault if the sanction was not accorded to the newly created post by the Government at appropriate time.
Actually, he had worked on the post of Superintendent Grade-III and was entitled for the salary for the period for which he worked on the said post.
Once the sanction was accorded by the Government from retrospective effect i.e. from 3121974, there is no reason for denying the benefit of arrears of payment of salary to the petitioner and the respondents have illegally and arbitrarily imposed the aforesaid condition in the order dated 131985 without any justification and reason.
Against the aforesaid condition, the petitioner also made a representation on 181985 and served a legal notice on 2581986 but when no action was taken on his representation as well as the legal notice, the petitioner filed the instant writ petition on 431987.
It is submitted by the petitioner that he retired from service on 3171986 after attaining the age of superannuation.
4.
Pursuant to the notice issued to the respondents, written statement has been filed.
The respondents have opposed the prayer of the petitioner on the ground that vide order dated 131985, the petitioner was given deemed date of promotion.
Actually, he was promoted to the post of Superintendent Grade-III with effect from 21111983.
Therefore, he was not entitled for any salary for the period i.e. from 3121974 to 20.11.1983, as he actually did not work and perform duties of Superintendent Grade-III during that period.
Therefore, the petitioner is not entitled for the salary for the said period on the principle of `no work no pay'.
5.
After hearing the arguments of learned counsel for both the parties and perusing the record of the case, I am of the opinion that the petitioner was wrongly denied the payment of arrears of pay from 3121974 to 21111980.
The denial of arrears of pay for the aforesaid period is totally illegal, arbitrary and unreasonable.
The respondents have not controverted the averment of the petitioner that he was assigned the duties and functions of the post of Superintendent Grade-III which was created for the petitioner on 3121974.
Though the temporary post of Superintendent Grade-III was created in the year 1974 and the petitioner was allowed to perform the duties on the said post, but he was being paid salary of the post of Assistant only on the plea that the Government has not accorded sanction for the creation of said post.
The said sanction was accorded by the Government on 131985 with retrospective effect i.e. from 3121974 to 20.11.1983.
The case in hand is not that the petitioner did not work on the post of Superintendent Grade-III.
Rather, he actually performed duties and functions of Superintendent Grade- III since 3121974, therefore, he cannot be denied the salary for that period on the principle `no work no pay'.
The petitioner was not at fault.
He was always available, ready and willing to perform the duties and functions of Superintendent Grade-III and actually, he had discharged duties and functions on the said post for the period in question.
In these facts and circumstances, the respondents were not justified at all to restrict the payment of arrears of pay to the petitioner for 37 months.
The condition imposed by the respondents in the letter dated 131985 is wholly illegal and arbitrary.
This Court in Vidya Parkash Harnal v. State of Haryana, 1995(3) SCT 785, after considering judgment of the Apex Court in Union of India v. KV Jankiraman, 1991(3) SCT 317 (SC) : 1991(5) SLR 602, observed as under :  "7.
If a civil servant is not offered the work to which he was legally entitled, he cannot be deprived of the wages for the post to which he subsequently is held entitled to.
Permitting such a course to be adopted would be encouraging the imposition of double penalty, that is, firstly by declining the civil servant his right of promotion and secondly by depriving him of the emoluments to which he would have been entitled to upon promotion which subsequently is considered in his favour.
Deprivation to work against the post to which a civil servant is entitled on promotion is always at the risk and responsibility of the State and cannot be made the basis for depriving such a civil servant of the emoluments to which he was entitled, had he been promoted in accordance with the rules at the time when he became eligible for such promotion.
The courts cannot ignore the magnitude of the sufferings and the pains to which a civil servant is subjected on account of deprivation of the monetary benefits particularly in this case of skyrocketing prices and non-availability of essential requirements of livelihood.
The Court cannot shut its eyes and forget the holocaust of economic deprivation to the petitioner and his dependents.
Such a deprivation might have upset the career of the dependents, depriving the society of the services of such youth and budding dependents or children of the petitioner.
The executive once being satisfied that a civil servant was entitled to the promotion with retrospective effect cannot deprive him of the benefits of salary accruing on account of such promotion from an early date without assigning valid, cogent and specific reasons."
Similarly, in Krishan Kumar v. Haryana State Federation of Consumers' Co- operative Wholesale Store Ltd, 1997(2) SCT 487 (SC) : 1997(3) Services Law Reporter 803, a Division Bench of this Court held as under :-  "4.
.....
If an employee is kept out of the job by passing an order of termination and that terminating order is held to be illegal and the court orders his re-instatement with all consequential benefits, the end result is that the employee is deemed to have worked during the period he has been per force kept out of service by the passing of an illegal order of termination.
He is deprived to actually do the work by the illegal action of the employer.
The employee had never refused to do the work.
Such an employee is also entitled to be considered for retrospective promotion when his juniors were promoted to the higher rank during the period he was kept out of service by an illegal order of termination.
If he is found to be suitable and eligible for promotion with retrospective effect, the necessary corollary is that he is deemed to have worked for all purposes on the higher post and is entitled to pay and wages."
6.
While directing the respondents to consider and to pay the payment of arrears of pay to an employee for the post on which he was retrospectively promoted a Division Bench of this Court in Avtar Singh v. State of Haryana and another, 1998(1) Recent Services Judgments 317 observed as under :  "In other words, the respondents admit their fault for not promoting the petitioner with effect from the due date.
We are of the view that in such circumstances if for no fault of the incumbent, he is not promoted and is deprived to work on the promoted post, he cannot be denied the pay of the promoted post, when he is promoted retrospectively with effect from the due date."
In JN Srivastava v. Union of India, (1998) 9 Supreme Court Cases 559, the Apex Court, while rejecting the contention of the respondents to deny the arrears of pay to an employee, who was deemed to have continued in service till his superannuation age because his request for withdrawal of notice for voluntary retirement was wrongly rejected, held that the said employee is entitled for arrears of salary and other emoluments including the increments because he was ready and willing to work.
7.
Keeping in view the aforesaid principles, the imposition of condition in the order dated 131985 by the respondents restricting the payment of arrears of salary to the petitioner to a maximum period of 37 months is wholly illegal, arbitrary and is liable to be quashed and the petitioner is entitled for the payment of arrears of pay on the post of Superintendent Grade-III from 3121974 to 21111980.
8.
In view of the aforesaid discussion, the instant writ petition is allowed and the condition imposed in the letter dated 131985 (Annexure P-1) restricting the payment of arrears of salary to the petitioner to a maximum period of 37 months is quashed and the respondents are directed to pay arrears of pay to the petitioner from 3121974 to 21111980 for the post of Superintendent Grade-III.
The respondents are further directed to pay the aforesaid arrears within a period of six months, failing which the petitioner will be entitled for simple interest at the rate of 9% per annum on the amount of the aforesaid arrears from the date of its accrual till the date of payment.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.