GS Singhvi, J - The only point which requires adjudication in this petition is whether or not the Labour Court, Jalandhar could pass an order under Section 33-C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for short 'the Act') against the petitioners.
2.
Since the respondents have not appeared to contest the writ petition in spite of the service of notice, we shall have to decide the case on the assumption that the averments made in the writ petition are correct.
3.
The facts mentioned in the writ petition show that the respondent No. 2 who was at the relevant time employed with the respondent No. 3, filed an application under Section 33-C(2) of the Act claiming Rs. 16500/- as arrears of provident fund contributions of the employees and the employer.
In the said application, the petitioner was impleaded as respondent No. 1.
It appears that no one appeared before the Labour Court on behalf of the petitioner as well as the respondent No. 3 and on the basis of the statement made by the respondent No. 2, the Labour Court passed the impugned order directing the petitioner and the respondent No. 3 to pay Rs. 16500/- to the respondent No. 2.
4.
Shri Sapra, learned counsel for the petitioner, argued that the order passed by the Labour Court is without jurisdiction so far as it concerned the petitioner because the petitioner does not fall within the definition of the 'employer'.
We are in agreement with him.
The petitioner is a statutory authority constituted under the Regional Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952.
It does not fall within the meaning of the terms 'employer' and `workman' as defined in the Act of 1947.
Therefore, the respondent No. 2 could not have invoked the jurisdiction of the Labour Court under Section 33-C(2) against the petitioner.
Therefore, we hold that the direction given by the Labour Court to the petitioner to pay Rs. 16500/- to the respondent No. 2 is without jurisdiction.
However, as far as the respondent No. 3 is concerned, the order passed by the Labour Court cannot be faulted because being the employer of respondent No. 2, the respondent No. 3 was under an obligation to pay to the workman the amount due to the workman under the provisions of 1952 Act.
5.
Consequently, we allow the writ petition and quash the impugned order in so far as it concerns the petitioner.
However, the workman respondent No. 2 shall be free to recover the amount due from the respondent No. 3 in accordance with law.
Petition allowed.