Swatanter Kumar, J - Vide order dated 16th September, 2002, impugned in the present writ petition, Principal Secretary, Punjab Government, Health Family Welfare Department, informed the petitioner that he is not entitled to study leave and the order 25th September, 2000 has been amended to grant him extra- ordinary leave for the entire period of his course with effect from 172000.
Challenge to the order, inter-alia, is on the following grounds :-  1. that the action of the respondent in altering the nature of the leave already granted to the petitioner is patently arbitrary and discriminatory; 2. no notice was given to the petitioner before the impugned order which vests the petitioner with civil consequences was passed and his study leave already sanctioned was converted to extraordinary leave; and  3. having made the petitioner execute a bond for five years, terms and conditions of which have been acted upon by the parties for two years, the respondents are estopped from altering the nature of the leave granted to the petitioner, particularly when it results in prejudice to the petitioner; and  4. the respondents have misconstrued and mis-read the relevant rules including rule 8126 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, for declining the extended study leave to the petitioner.
2.
Before we proceed to examine the merits of these contentions, it will be appropriate to refer to necessary facts giving rise to the present writ petition.
3.
The petitioner was appointed as PCMS Class-I in the State of Punjab upon the recommendation of the Public Service Commission.
He joined his duties as Medical Officer on 1911997 and he remained posted as Medical Officer in the rural areas.
The petitioner became eligible for admission to MD/MS courses in the Punjab Medical College under 60% quota allotted for such medical officers.
On 16th May, 1996, instructions in this regard were issued.
On 25th April, 2000, Post Graduate Institute of Medical Science & Research, Chandigarh, issued prospectus for the purpose of admission to Post Graduate MD/M.S.MDS.
Courses commencing from July, 2000.
Candidates sponsored by the government, autonomous body of the State Government were also eligible, who had worked for a period of three years in that institutions.
Under the sponsored category, the petitioner applied and the respondent No. 2, vide letter dated 19th April, 2000 sponsored the case of the petitioner to the PGI, copy of the letter is annexed to the writ petition as Annexure P/2.
The petitioner appeared in Post Graduate Entrance Test under that category and the result of the Entrance Test was declared.
The petitioner was selected.
Respondent No. 3 vide letter dated 14th June, 20000 informed the petitioner about the selection of the petitioner in MD Paediatrics three years course and required the petitioner to execute a bound on a non-judicial stamp paper for the value of Rupees two lacs.
On 22nd of the June, 2000, the petitioner was relieved by the Civil Surgeon, Ropar to join the PG Course at PGI On 28th June, 2000, the petitioner executed a bound undertaking therein that he would serve the Punjab Government for a minimum period of five years after completion of the post graduate course and in default thereof to pay a sum of Rs. 2 lacs to the State Government.
On 1st of July, 2000, after sanction by the competent authority, the petitioner joined this course at PGI The Director PGI informed the concerned authority that the petitioner would not be paid any emoluments/stipend during the period of the study.
The Governor of Punjab accorded sanction under Rule 8126 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Vol.
I, Part-I, study leave to the petitioner for doing his MD Pediatric in PGI vide letter dated 25th September, 2000.
For all this time, the petitioner was paid his salary, as his salary was drawn against a vacant post.
However, salary of the petitioner was stopped on 30th June, 2000.
The petitioner made representation to the respondents to release his salary, but to his surprise he received the impugned letter dated 16th September, 2002 informing him that his study leave has been converted to extraordinary leave and he would not be entitled to any salary for that complete period and the ground stated was that he had not completed five years of his government job at the relevant time.
It is also averred in the writ petition that the PGI vide its letter dated 20th December, 2000 informed that it would not entertain the candidates who are not sponsored and are self financed.
4.
Reply/written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents, where facts are hardly disputed.
All that has been stated is that the study leave could not be granted to the petitioner as he has rendered less than five years of service at the time of his selection to the course in question, as such, impugned order is in consonance with the rules and is not arbitrary.
According to the respondents, the case was referred to the Department of Finance for grant of study leave which has been rejected.
The petitioner is not entitled to get the salary and if the petitioner wishes to continue the said course he would have to resign from his job.
5.
The contentions raised on behalf of the petitioner are quite inter- dependent and thus, can be discussed together.
The basic question that has to be determined by the Court is whether the petitioner was sanctioned study leave and if so, then could it be withdrawn or altered in the manner the respondents have done.
6.
We have already noticed that there is not much dispute to the facts of the present case.
The petitioner was in service with the State of Punjab in PCMS cadre.
He had applied for grant of study leave and he on his own merit got admission into the Post Graduate Course in the PGI in MD (Paediatrics).
The application was forwarded and submitted by the petitioner through Department and after completion of all formalities, the petitioner was granted study leave for the purpose of pursuing his Post-Graduation Course which was of 3 years.
Vide letter dated 1942000, the State Government had forwarded the application forms to the Registrar, PGI, Chandigarh.
The Director PGI had informed the petitioner vide letter dated 1462000 that he had been selected for the Post Graduation Course in the Institute starting from July, 2000.
The selection was subject to the terms and conditions stated in the letter.
Under condition No. 1, it was clearly stated that the petitioner be deputed/sponsored candidate from the Punjab Government.
Under clause 4, it was stipulated that duration of the course is 3 years.
The Director, Health and family Welfare, Punjab vide letter dated 2262000, informed the Civil Surgeon, Ropar about the selection of the petitioner and further requiring the said authority to relieve the petitioner well in time and also requiring the petitioner to sign the bond.
The language of the said letter can be appropriately reproduced at this stage.
The relevant part thereof reads as under :-  "So, the above said doctor may kindly be relieved well in time for joining the Post Graduation Course and before relieving him study leave on prescribed proforma may be got filled from him and a bond of Rs. Two lac may be got filled from regular employee/office and be forwarded to the office."
7.
The petitioner executed a bond with the terms and conditions required by the respondents and specifically stated that he would serve the Government at least for a period of 5 years after his return to duty.
In furtherance to the letter of the Government, the petitioner was relieved on 3062001 and he joined his Post Graduate Course on 172000.
There is no dispute before us that for all these two years, the petitioner was paid his salary in accordance with the rules treating the leave of the petitioner as study leave which was in fact, granted to him.
In other words, the study leave was sanctioned to the petitioner by the competent authority in accordance with rules.
The consequences and benefits thereof were given to the petitioner.
For a continuous period of 2 years, this was acted upon, but after the expiry of 2 years when the petitioner asked for a further leave to one year, the extension was declined to the petitioner by the respondents vide impugned letter dated 292002.
The same read as under :-  "Dr. Aurobindo Mitra, Medical Officer Merit No. 149 GC 96 was given the study leave by Govt.
Memo No. 25/14/2000-3C 2/23187-91 dated 2592000, from 172000 to 3062002 for doing PG Course but Dr. Aurobindo Mitra had not completed 5 years of his Govt. job as a result of which he is not entitled for study leave.
Hon'ble Governor while granting the approval to amend Punjab Govt. order issued vide Memo No. 26/14/2000-3C2/23187-91 dated 2592000 is pleased to grant sanction to treat the leave of Dr. Aurobindo Mitra Medical Officer for PG Course w.e.f.
172000 as extraordinary leave.
The terms and conditions will remain same as in Memo No. 23187-91 dated 2592000.
A bare reading of the impugned order shows that the study leave granted to the petitioner by letter dated 25.9.2002 has been converted/altered into an extraordinary leave.
This conversion has certainly affected the petitioner prejudicially.
Admittedly, the petitioner was not granted any opportunity before the benefits which were granted to him by the competent authority were withdrawn an as in fact, his entire future was placed at stake for no fault of his own or even an error directly or indirectly attributable to the petitioner.
The petitioner had made no misrepresentation to the Department.
In fact, at every step, his application and requests were properly scrutinised and discretion exercised by the competent authority.
8.
Thus, it was not a case of suggesto falsi or supresso veri.
The authorities have scrutinised the matter at different stages and the petitioner has been permitted to complete his 2 years of the 3 years course and his admission does not offend any law or statute.
In these circumstances, and in view of the principles enunciated by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Shri Krishan v. Kurukshetra University, A.I.R. 1976 S.C. 376, it will not be in the interest of justice to permit the authorities to withdraw the benefits of study leave more particularly when the PGI has threatened to cancel his candidature as they do not accept self-sponsored/financed candidates under this quota.
9.
Reference can also be made to the judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court in Sahib Ram v. State of Haryana, 1995(1) SCT 668 where it was held as under :-  "Since the date of relaxation the appellant had been paid his salary on revised scale.
However, it is not on account of any misrepresentation made by the appellant that the benefit of higher pay-scale was given to him but by wrong construction made by the Principal for which the appellant cannot be held to be at fault.
Under the circumstances, the amount paid till date may not be recovered from the appellant."
Rule 8126 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules specifically deals with grant of leave to a Government employee on such terms and conditions by the competent authority to enable him to study special course.
This leave is not debited against his leave account.
As per instructions issued by the Government, in furtherance to this rule under Appendix 20, Clause 5, the study leave was not ordinarily to be granted.
The relevant part of clause 5 reads as under :-  (5) Study leave shall not ordinarily be granted to a Government employee - (i) who has rendered less than five years service under the Government ; or (ii) who is due to retire or has the option to retire from the Government service within three years of the date on which he is expected to return to duty after the expiry of the leave."
10.
According to the respondents, the above condition absolutely bars the grant fo study leave to a doctor of the service who has not completed 5 years of service under the Government.
It is as a result thereof the respondents have withdrawn the benefit of study leave and altered it to extraordinary leave.
This argument suffers from a basic fallacy.
The instructions issued are to carry out an object which has been stated in these detailed instructions that is to permit the doctors in service of the Government to acquire specialisation/super-specialisation in their profession and ultimately to render the service to the common man being treated in Government hospital.
Such sponsored doctors have to execute a bond that they would serve the State and its hospitals at least for a period of 5 years after attaining the higher qualification.
The object under the instructions is laudable and must be construed on the cumulative reading of these instructions.
The intention of the rule making authority is clear that the competent authority under these instructions must consider all aspects of the matter and then come to a proper conclusion by permitting or declining permission to a sponsored doctor of the service for attaining higher qualifications.
The expression "shall not ordinarily be granted" sufficiently indicates the discretion intended to be reposed in the competent authority.
The discretion would have to be exercised by the competent authority keeping in view the exigencies and the need for doctors for a particular specialisation with higher qualification.
But once such a discretion is exercised in favour of the doctor despite the fact that he had not completed 5 years of Government service on the date of his sponsorship to the Institute, then the Government would be estopped from withdrawing such permission after a lapse of 2 years in normal circumstances.
11.
The Court must assume that the authorities have considered various aspects and facts before granting such permission and the permission has been granted in accordance with rules and instructions.
The administrative action normally is assumed to have been done in adherence to the rules and instructions.
In this regard, reference can be made to a Full Bench decision of this Court in the case of Dr. Ashok Kumar v. State of Punjab, 1998(1) SCT 78 (P&H) : 1997(7) SLR 1 where the Court held as under :-  "14.
The basic ingredients which would normally bind a party to its promise or permission are that there should be clear promise or permission on behalf of the State, which should be in conformity with the rules and regulations and others persons should be (have ?)
acted thereupon, though not necessarily to his prejudice.
These ingredients have been fully satisfied in this case.
The provisions of promissory estoppel are certainly attracted in the present case against the State.
The State had issued no objection certificate for the duration of the course at the cost of the State.
The petitioner had executed a bond which contained definite terms in regard to duration of course which was accepted by the authorities and consequently the petitioner was relieved from his duty in the hospital to join the course at Medical College, Amritsar.
Furthermore, obligation was on the controlling authority to verify the facts and compliance of the rules in terms of the no objection certificate dated 591991 before relieving the petitioner.
15.
Having taken the above exercise and having granted permission to petitioner in its discretion, the Government would be estopped from varying the terms of the No Objection Certificate or construing the terms of the bond to the disadvantage of the petitioner.
We are unable to see as to what prejudice is likely to be caused to the State as the petitioner had executed the prescribed bond in favour of the State.
The bond specified the minimum period of service which the petitioner was required to render after completing the course of the State, in default thereof he was liable to pay specified sum to the Government.
Promissory estoppel being an extension of principle of equity, its basic purpose is to promote justice founded on fairness and relieve of (the ?)
promise of any injustice perpetrated due to promisor going back on his promise unless it is contrary to public policy or prohibited by law.
(Amrit Banaspati Co Ltd and another v. State of Punjab and another, JT 1992(2) SC 217).
The present case is certainly not one where the permission was ultra vires the Rules or competence of the Authority granting such relief.
Thus, the Court would not come to the reduce of the defaulting party and more so when the action springs from exercise of powers in furtherance to the statutory provisions.
Such an action would not come within the exceptions laid down by Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Vasant Kumar Radha Kishan Vora v. The Board of Trustees of Port of Bombay, JT 1990(3) SC 609."
12.
The respondents had granted permission to the petitioner to pursue his Post Graduation Course in Paediatrics, the duration of which was 3 years.
This fact was fully known to the authority and they relieved the petitioner only after examining the case even from this point of view.
We cannot appreciate that permission for study leave was granted to the petitioner for a period of 2 years and it was specifically known to all concerned that duration of the course was 3 years.
Another pertinent fact which we must notice at this stage is that the doctors of the same service who do their post Graduation from Medical Colleges in the State of Punjab or the Medical Colleges outside the State are required to complete 3 years of service under the Government before they are deputed to such course.
Why should the order of study leave in favour of the petitioner be revoked or altered just because he had not rendered 5 years of service under the State, does not appear to be reasonable in the facts and circumstances of the case No records have been produced before us, nor any averments have been made in the written statement which could justify the impugned action on the part of the respondents.
Even in equity, the action of the respondents cannot be sustained.
The petitioner has admittedly completed 2 years of his study at the expense of the Government while being on study leave.
Now, if the said study leave is converted into extraordinary leave, the petitioner will not only suffer in terms of finance and leave account, but would also suffer irreparable loss as the PGI has threatened to cancel his candidature.
This would result in ruining the entire academic career of the petitioner, which appears to us, would be very unjust and unfair.
Another Division Bench of this Court in C.W.P.
No. 822 of 1988 (Dr. Satish Kumar and others v. The State of Punjab and others) decided on 1791991 even took the view that discrimination for payment of stipend and salaries based on qualification of 3 years rendered service and of 5 years under the Government would be violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
13.
For the reasons afore-stated, we are of the considered view that the impugned letter dated 292002 issued on 16.9.2001 Annexure P-12 is liable to be quashed which we do hereby direct.
The petitioner obviously would be entitled to all the consequential benefits of the remaining period in terms of the sanction granted in his favour by the competent authority vide its letter dated 2592000 Annexure P-8.
The petitioner shall abide by the terms and conditions of the bond.
The writ petition, thus is allowed in the above terms, however, leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition allowoed.