Swatanter Kumar, J - By this judgment we propose to dispose of the afore- noticed four writ petitions.
Common question arises for consideration based on similar facts in all these four writ petitions, therefore, for the purposes of convenience we are referring to the facts of Civil Writ Petition No. 2564 of 2002.
2.
All the twenty petitioners are the retired employees of the Punjab Khadi & Village Industries Board (hereinafter referred to as `the Board').
The Board is a corporate body established under the Punjab Khadi and Village Industries Board Act, 1955 (hereinafter referred to as `the Act').
According to the petitioners, under the service regulations, they are governed by the same conditions and rules of service as are applicable to the employees of State of Punjab possessing equal status.
A Committee was appointed by the Government for the consideration of revision of pay scales of the employees of the Board in the year 1989.
A meeting of the Committee was held and it was decided by the Committee that the TA/DA, CCA and other benefits, as allowed to the employees of the Director of Industries, Punjab, under Punjab Civil Services (Revised Pay) Rules, 1988, be allowed to the employees of the Board.
Introduction of pension scheme, as decided by the Board, was recommended and sent for approval of the Government.
Vide letter dated 10121993, the Government decided that the Board and its institution should decide the case of grant of pension to its employees at its own level.
Copy of this letter is annexed to the writ petition as Annexure P-3.
On 2931995 the Board in its meeting passed the following resolution :-  "6.1.
The Board considered the matter at length vis-a-vis the legal advice of the Senior Advocate and the financial implications as projected and decided to implement the Pension Scheme in lieu of Contributory Provident Fund Scheme.
62 The Board also decided to extend the pensionary benefit to those employees who have retired after 26489 i.e. 5 years prior to the cut off date, which has been reckoned as 26494, after completing the formalities and receiving back the Board's share of contributory provident fund with interest.
The retirees would become eligible to the scheme only after they have deposited back the Board's share with interest w.e.f.
the month following immediately thereafter."
3.
The approval of the Board was reiterated in its subsequent meeting held on 2061995 and the Pension Regulations, 1994 were framed by the Board.
Additional Secretary to the Government of Punjab, Finance Department, and other nominees of the Government were present in the meeting of the Board.
As pension scheme was not implemented the persons who had retired earlier to the petitioners filed a writ petitions before this Court being Civil Writ Petition No. 1025 of 1996 and Civil Writ Petition No. 481 of 1996.
This writ petition was allowed and the respondent-Board was directed to grant pension.
The decision of the writ petition was challenged by the Board in Letters Patent Appeal, which was also disposed of with certain directions.
On 16.1.1998 Government of Punjab issued notification revising the pay scales of the employees so were the pay scales of the Board revised.
The Board did not pay to the petitioners pension and other benefits on the basis of the revised pay scales.
A revision was submitted by the petitioners to the Chief Minister, Punjab, copy of which is annexed as Annexure P-9, praying for the grant of pension.
The request made in the revision was not acceded to by the concerned authorities.
It is submitted by the petitioners that presently the Board is not releasing the pension on the plea that the Government has not released funds to the Board in terms of its obligations and according to the Government there was no concurrence.
The petitioners, thus, have filed the present writ petition praying for a direction to the respondents to grant pension in accordance with the scheme with interest.
4.
Upon notice, the respondents filed a reply.
The main stand of the respondent-State is that no approval or concurrence was ever granted by the State to the Board for implementing the pension rules.
It is also stated that the financial position of the Board is pathetic and it is not a financially viable scheme.
The differences of revised pay scales were released and other claims of the petitioners, in any case, cannot be satisfied for want of funds.
Other facts are not much in dispute.
5.
It was vehemently argued on behalf of the State while relying upon the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Balco Employees Union (Regd.)
v. Union of India and others, 2002(2) SCT 12 12 (SC) : 2002(2) R.S.J.
508 that these are the policy matters of the State after considering the financial status and the Court should not interfere in such matters in exercise of its writ jurisdiction.
6.
In some of the cases separate reply was also filed by the Board and the Member Secretary of the Board.
It is specifically stated that pension scheme was implemented by the Board in the year 1995-96 in lieu of contributory fund scheme.
The amount in the contributory provident fund account of the employees of the Board was transferred to pension scheme, which stood at Rs. 4166 lacs at that time.
In reply to paragraph No. 14 of the writ petition No. 12188 of 1999, the Board has stated as under :-  "It is submitted that in view of the financial position of the Board, it was decided to pay the pension in the revised scheme less the amount of commuted value of the unrevised pension which the petitioner has already withdrawn.
The Board shall pay the revised commuted value of pension at the subsequent stage after deducting difference in the revised and unrevised commuted value of the pension after reviewing the financial position."
7.
There cannot be any dispute to the proposition of law that framing of policies primarily falls in the domain of the competent authorities and the Government.
The Courts, normally, would not interfere in the matters of policy and would leave it for the Legislature to legislate in its own wisdom.
Legislative functions, whether primary or subordinate, are the functions of legislative bodies and with the specified exceptions apart, such policies particularly involving financial liabilities would be permitted to be implemented by the State.
In substance that is the principle enunciated by the Hon'ble Apex Court in Balco's case (supra) as well as AK Roy v. Union of India and another, A.I.R. 1982 Supreme Court 710.
But, in the present case, this controversy does not arise for our consideration.
8.
The question for determination in the present writ petitions is a very limited one.
According to the petitioners as well as the Board, pension scheme has been implemented in accordance with law.
According to the State the pension scheme and other ancillary benefits cannot be granted to the petitioners as at no stage or point of time, the State Government granted its concurrence for such implementation.
Absence of approval/consent would render the scheme ineffective and inapplicable.
Thus, firstly, we must examine whether consent was given by the State to the Board, as a matter of fact, or not, in this regard.
9.
From the record before us, it is clear that the Board had decided to implement the pension scheme after revision of the pay scale in its meeting in the year 1989.
The matter was taken up with the Government.
The Government vide its letter dated 10121993 after lapse of a considerable time had directed not only the respondent-Board, but most of the Government undertakings and Corporations to take decision at their own level and, thus, to implement the scheme in their own wisdom.
The relevant part of the letter dated 10121993, copy of which is annexed herewith as Annexure P-3, reads as under :-  "Subject :- Introduction of pension scheme in lieu of Contributory Provident Fund to the employees of the Public Undertakings.
Reference Government letter No. 14/97/92-51B, dated 3491, 22591, 5691, 231291, 10.2.92, 26392, 20.5.92, 22.12.92, 8193, 20193, 4393, 30793, 30893, 21993 and 221093 on the subject noted above.
It is intimated that it was decided by the Department of Institutional Finance & Banking & Public Enterprises that do not pursue the case any further, let the undertakings to decide for its own level.
Sd/-  Superintendent,  No. 14/97/91-51B/7538 Dated, Chandigarh, the 10121993.
A copy is forwarded to the Department of Institutional Finance and Banking and Bureau of Public Enterprises for information with their observation dated 13.10.93.
Sd/-  Superintendent."
After receiving this letter the Board granted its consent and approval for implementation of the scheme in its meeting on 2931995 (minutes referred supra) and then even framed the regulations in that regard.
No provision has been brought to our notice under which prior approval of the Government was mandatory for implementation of such scheme.
Under Section 31 of the Act, the Government has the discretion to issue direction to the Board in regard to its policy matters.
While under Section 31-A of the Act the Government has definite control over the functioning of the Board and it can even suspend the Board and re-constitute the same.
But the fact remains that the Government at no point of time right from the year 1996 to 2002 issued directions to the Board not to implement the pension scheme.
Under Section 17 of the Act pay and other conditions of service of the officers and other servants of the Board shall be as the Board may determine by regulation.
In other words, the Board is the final authority to provide conditions of service obviously including the benefits which the employees of the Board would be entitled to upon their retirement.
The budget of the Board has to be placed before the Legislative Assembly in conformity with the provisions of Section 26 of the Act.
In the present case the budget was certainly placed with the provision for pension to the employee before the Legislative Assembly.
This right in conjunction with the letter of the Government fully provides a consent, if not otherwise, then by necessary implication.
10.
Under Regulation 1 of the Punjab Khandi and Village Industries Board Regulations, 1958 (Regulations - for short) the employees of the Board shall generally be governed by the same conditions and rules of service, as are applicable to the Government servants of the State of Punjab possessing equal status.
Undisputedly, the respondent Board is a body corporate established under the Act and how it has to conduct its business is specified under the Act and the Regulations.
The official members of the Board are Finance Secretary to the Government of Punjab; Registrar, Co-operative Societies, Punjab; Director, Rural Development and Panchayats, Punjab and Director of Industries, being the Member Secretary of the Board.
This is the representation of the Government in the Board.
The Board has to take its own decision in regard to implementation of its scheme and business.
The Board had taken a decision and had sent the same for consent/approval of the Government.
11.
In the above circumstances, we are unable to agree with the contention of the State that there was no concurrence or sanction of the State in implementation of the pension scheme.
The Government of its accord directed the Board to decide the matters at its own level.
Once that direction was specific and unambiguous acting upon which the Board took a decision, the Government cannot be permitted to turn around and plead that scheme was without approval of the State.
In fact, vide letter dated 921996 Annexure P-5 to the writ petition, the copy of the scheme, as demanded by the Principal Secretary to the Government of Punjab, Finance Department, was also sent.
It is not a case of implied consent, but there is specific approval empowering the Board to take decisions at its own level.
The Board had taken complete care to bring it to the notice of the Government formulation, implementation and ineffectiveness of the pension scheme at both the stages of post and pre- decision.
Thus, we cannot find any error in the decision of the Board and it does not suffer from the infirmity of lack of approval of the State even it was so required.
12.
Another fact which could hardly be disputed is that the budget estimate for the year 1997-98 presented to the Legislative Assembly clearly indicates the demand for grant of Government of Punjab for the year 1997-98.
It further shows that funds for pension to the employee of the Board were got approved by the Government of Punjab.
This fact is further elucidated in Annexures P-13 and P-14, the letters exchanged between the Director of Industries and the Finance Department of the State of Punjab.
13.
In the light of the above discussion, now we may proceed to notice the decision of the learned Single Judge of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 1025 of 1996, decided on 7.12.1998 wherein the Court directed as under :-  "I accordingly allow the writ petition and direct the respondents to give pension to the petitioner from the date of his retirement subject to the condition that the petitioner shall deposit the share of Board towards the CPF with interest @ 12% P.A.
from the date of his retirement till the date of such deposit.
On making deposit as stated, the petitioner will be entitled for the pension from the date of his retirement to which he is entitled too as per the regulations.
The petitioner shall deposit the share of the Board's contribution along with interest within 3 months from today.
No order as to cost."
The Letters Patent Appeal preferred by the respondent-Board was also disposed of, where the Board had agreed to release the benefits and L.P.A. No. 100 of 1999 was disposed of vide order dated 10.3.1999, which reads as under :-  "The appeal is taken up for disposal forthwith."
Learned counsel for the appellant-Board states that the Board shall pay to the respondent-employees pensionary benefits in accordance with the Regulation w.e.f.
March 1, 1999.
Subject to the employees refunding the Board's contribution made for deposit of the Provident fund and that the Board will not claim payment of interest thereon.
The offer made on behalf of the appellant-Board is accepted by the respondent-employees.
Accordingly, the appeal is disposed of in the above terms."
14.
In the light of the judgments of the Court, the stand taken by the Board and the fact that the State Government at no point time, ever raised any objection to the implementation of the scheme and on the other hand, by specific direction authorised the Board to take a final decision in regard to implementation of the pension scheme, we have no hesitation in coming to the conclusion that the present writ petitions be allowed.
In view of the above discussion, we allow these writ petitions with a direction to the respondents to implement the pension scheme and pay the consequential benefits to the petitioners as expeditiously as possible.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petitions allowed.