JS Khehar, J - The petitioner was inducted as a Medical Officer in the Directorate of Health Services, Haryana, by an order dated 6111997.
The appointment of the petitioner was on a fixed salary of Rs. 8,000/- per month and for a period of six months from the date of the joining.
Letter of appointment clearly indicated that the services of the petitioner, being on contract basis, could be terminated at any time without assigning any reason with 24 hours notice on either side.
2.
By an order dated 2532002, the services of the petitioner have been terminated.
The aforesaid order is the subject matter of challenge before this Court in the present writ petition.
The impugned order dated 2532002 clearly depicts that the order of termination of the petitioner is relatable to misconduct indicated in the order itself.
Learned counsel for the petitioner, therefore, submits that the order of the termination dated 2532002 being penal in nature, the authorities could not have terminated his services on the basis of term of contract whereby either party could have terminated the tenure of employment by a notice of 24 hours.
Learned counsel for the petitioner in this behalf relies on a decision rendered by the Apex Court in AP State Fed.
of Coop.
Spinning Mills Ltd and another v. PV Swaminathan, 2001(3) SCT 28 (SC) : 2001(2) Recent Services Judgments 247, wherein the Apex Court observed as under :-  "The learned position is fairly well settled that an order of termination of a temporary employee or probationer or even at tenure employee, simplicitor without casting any stigma may not be interfered with by court.
But the court is not barred from looking to the attendant circumstances, namely, the circumstances prior to the issuance of order of termination to find out whether the alleged inefficiency really was the motive for the order of termination or formed the foundation for the same order.
If the court comes to a conclusion that the order was in fact, the motive, then obviously the order would not be interfered with, but if the court comes to a conclusion that the so called inefficiency was the real foundation for the passing of order of termination, then obviously such an order would be held to be penal in nature and must be interfered with since the appropriate procedure has not been followed.
The decision of this Court relied upon by Mr. K Ram Kumar also stipulates that if an allegation of arbitrariness is made in assailing an order of termination, it will be open for the employer to indicate how and what was the motive of passing the order of termination, and it is in that sense in the counter-affidavit.
It can be indicated that the unsuitability of the person was the reason for which the employer acted in accordance with the terms of employment and it never wanted to punish the employee.
But on examining the assertions made in paragraphs 13 and 14 of the counter- affidavit, in the present case it would be difficult for us to hold that in the case in hand, the employer appellant really terminated the services in accordance with the terms of the employment and not by way of imposing the penalty in question."
3.
It is evident from the record of this case that the petitioner before his services were terminated had rendered about four and half years of employment as Medical Officer.
His employment has been brought to an end, admittedly, on account of misconduct alleged in the order dated 2532002 whereupon a formal order of termination was issued on 1142002.
The petitioner has never been afforded an opportunity to rebut the allegations levelled against him in the order dated 2532002.
Obviously, an order having adverse civil consequences has been passed against the petitioner without affording him an opportunity of hearing in terms of the rules of natural justice.
The controversy in question, in our view, is squarely covered by the decision rendered by the Apex Court in AP State Fed.
of Coop.
Spinning Mills Ltd and another (supra).
The term of appointment of contract whereby the contracted party is aggrieved that the employment can be brought to an end by a notice of 24 hours on either side, will, in the facts and circumstances of the present case, not be relevant while examining the issue of termination of the petitioner which is clearly based on misconduct alleged therein.
4.
For the reasons recorded above, this writ petition is allowed.
Orders dated 2532002 and 1142002, Annexures P-6 and P-7, are set aside.
The petitioner shall be entitled to all consequential benefits.
5.
Despite conclusion drawn hereinabove, it will be open to the authorities to take such action as may be considered appropriate against the petitioner on the basis of the allegations referred to in the order dated 2532002 in compliance with the statutory rules governing the services of the petitioner or the rules of natural justice, as the case may be.
Petition allowed.