Jayant Patel, J - The present petition is filed by the petitioners for the reliefs, inter alia, to issue appropriate direction declaring that the petitioners are entitled to payscale of Rs. 380-560/- with retrospective effect, i.e. from the date of their appointment and also to direct the Government to give to the petitioners the payscale of Rs. 380-560/- from their respective date of appointment SCA/1248/1993 judgment dated 1542002 and to pay arrears etc with 15% interest per month.
2.
The short facts of the case are that the petitioners were appointed on adhoc basis as proof readers on 1811982 in the payscale of Rs. 260-400/- for census work.
It is the contention of the petitioners that after their appointment as per the order passed in May, 1982 copy whereof is produced at annexure "C" to the petition, the scale accorded to the petitioners was Rs. 350-560/-.
However, subsequently, an order dated 13.7.1982 was passed by the State Government whereby it was stated that in the earlier order dated 3151982 the correct payscale should be Rs. 260-400/- and not Rs. 350-560/-.
The contention of the petitioners in the petition is that they are doing same type of work as is being done by the proof readers working in Government press and others and the proof readers of Government press are being given payscale of Rs. 350-560/- whereas the petitioners who are discharging the same job and they are not given equal pay.
The case of the petitioners is that they are also posted in the Government press on deputation basis and therefore they should get the same payscale being given by the State Government to the proof readers in Government press.
Petitioners have preferred this petition invoking the principle of equal pay for equal work.
3.
On behalf of the State Government an affidavit in reply and further affidavit in reply has been filed contending that the capacity of the petitioners as proof readers working in census department cannot be equated with the proof readers of the Government press and it is further submitted that so far as the proof readers of Government press are concerned there are separate recruitment rules and for appointment of proof readers in Government press one has to pass a test which is provided as per the recruitment rules which is not in the case so far as the appointment of the petitioners is concerned.
It is also submitted that the petitioners are appointed on ad hoc basis.
However, the fact remains that though the nomenclature of the petitioners is that of ad hoc they are in service as proof readers engaged for census and the respondents have contended in the affidavit in reply that the petitioners are not entitled to backwages since the nature of their work is different.
4.
Mr. Tanna appearing for the petitioners submitted that the nature of work which the petitioners are discharging is of the same type which is being discharged by the proof readers working in the Government press and the contention of Mr. Tanna is that principles of equal pay for equal work is a well known principle guaranteed under the Constitution of India and therefore though the petitioners were appointed in 1982 merely because they preferred the petition in the year 1993 should not be made as a ground for disentitling them to get the equal pay for equal work.
Mr. Tanna alternatively submitted that even if this Court finds that the petitioners were entiteld to equal pay for equal work they can not be granted prospectively and for the arrears the petitioners are prepared to leave the matter to the court for its discretion.
Mr. Tanna relied upon the judgment of the Apex Court in the matter of Chief Conservator of Forests v. Jagannath Maruti Kondhare, reported in 1996(2) SCT 165 (SC) : (1996) 2 SCC 293 : (1996 Lab IC 967) which is a case for permanency benefits to the casual labour.
Mr. Tanna also relied on the judgment of the Apex Court in the case of Gujarat Agricultural University v. Rathod Labhu Bechar, reported in 2001(2) SCT 394 (SC) : AIR 2001 SC 706 : (2001 Lab IC 649), which is a case for deprecating the stand of the statutory authority in not regularizing the employees who are working for a longer period as daily rated labourers.
Mr. Tanna also relied upon another judgment of the Apex Court in the matter of the Union of India v. Tejram Parashramji Bombhate, reported in 1992(2) SCT 467 (SC) : AIR 1992 SC 570 : (1992 Lab IC 353) which is a case for regularization of services of teachers.
Mr. Tanna submitted that merely because the nomenclature in the appointment order shown is that of ad hoc it should not be made a ground for depriving the petitioners from invoking the principles of equal pay for equal work.
5.
Mr. Harsha Devani, Ld.
AGP appearing on behalf of respondents submitted that the post of the petitioners is only for census work and they were appointed only on ad hoc basis and she submitted that considering the nature of work and the duty being discharged by the petitioners vis a vis the nature and work and duties discharged by the proof readers in the Government press cannot be said to be the same.
She further submitted that the proof readers working in Government press have to send the material directly to the press for printing and it does not require any further supervision of control whereas so far as the petitioners are concerned it is case of the State Government they are working as proof readers subject to supervision and control of Research Assistant, Assistant Director and the Deputy Director of the Office.
Ms. Devani further submitted that the appointment of proof reader in Government press is based on objective test and on passing of that test only appointment orders are required to be issued in the Government press and whereas as far as the proof readers working in Dist.
Census work no test is prescribed nor any test was held by the department and, therefore, it cannot be equated with the proof readers working in the Government press.
Ms. Devani submitted that the petitioners have accepted the appointment order as back as in the year 1982 and subsequently it is not open to the petitioners to challenge the said scale which was mentioned in the appointment order, more particularly, after a period of 11 years.
She further submitted that since the nomenclature is of proof reader, it cannot be made a ground for getting payment of equal pay for equal work contending that the other proof readers even though they are differently situated must be granted the same payscale.
She further submitted that in the State Government itself Directors of different departments are holding the posts having different payscales as per Rules and therefore merely because of work as a Director it cannot be said to be the same in order to invoke the principles of equal pay for equal work.
She submitted that in the view the nature of work which the petitioners are discharging and in view of specific provisions made in recruitment rules for appointment of proof readers in Government press more particularly for appearing in the test and then to make themselves eligible for appointment the petitioners are not entitled to invoke the principle of equal pay equal work.
Ms. Devani relied upon the judgments of Apex Court in the matters of Federation of All India Customs and Central Excise Stenographers (Recognized) v. Union of India, reported in (1988) 3 SCC 91 : (1989 Lab IC 1157), State of Madhya Pradesh v. Pramod Bhartiya, reported in 1993(1) SCT 138 (SC) : (1993) 1 SCC 539 : (1992 Lab IC 2418) and Garhwal Jal Sansthan Karmachari Union v. State of Uttar Pradesh, reported in 1997(2) SCT 367 (SC) : AIR 1997 SC 2143 : (1997 Lab IC 2101), to contend that the principle of equal pay for equal work is not applicable where distinction is base on qualitative difference in the functions and the responsibilities and she submitted that since such distinction is available in the present case the petitioners are not entitled to invoke the principle of equal pay for work even if the defence of the State that the petition is barred by delay and laches is not considered.
6.
Before I examine the facts of the case, it is necessary to deal with the contention of the respondents that the petition is barred by delay and laches.
In this regard, if the record is seen the petitioners have been appointed as back as on 1811982.
When the appointment order was issued the scale granted to the petitioners was Rs. 260-400/- and the petitioners have not made any grievance, whatsoever, at the time when they were appointed.
In view of that for a period of about 10 years the petitioners have continued to accept such order and payscale which is granted to the petitioners i.e. Rs. 260-400/- and, therefore, it can be legitimately argued that the petitioners have accepted the order and, therefore, they are not entitled to challenge the same after a period of 11 years.
At the same time, principal of equal pay for equal work is read in the fundamental rights guaranteed under the Constitution of India and it is well settled that there can be no bar of waiver of any fundamental right and, therefore, the principles of estopped or acquiescence cannot operate against the fundamental rights guaranteed under Constitution of India.
Further even the payment of salary or wages is a continuous action on the part of the State Government and, therefore, if the case is to be considered for invoking the principles with retrospective effect.
Perhaps, the State may be justified in raising the defence but so far as the prospective effect is concerned if the court finds that there is breach of fundamental rights, the principles of delay, laches and/or acquiescence should not came in the way of petitioners and, therefore, the said contention deserves to be rejected and is rejected.
7.
In view of the rival contentions of the parties, it will have to be examined as to whether the post held by the petitioners can be said to be the same as being held by the proof readers working in the Government press and whether the work and the responsibilities which are being discharged by the petitioners are the same as being discharged by the proof readers working in the Government press.
8.
The petitioners have made averments alleging that they are holding the same post and doing the same type of work and for contending that it is of same type of work, the petitioners have also produced one order dated 13111987 posting the petitioners to work in the printing press.
However, a bare persual of the order dated 13111987 issued by the Deputy Director of Dist.
Census shows that in the press also the nature of work which was to be discharged by the petitioners was for census.
It may not be forgotten that the petitioners are appointed on ad hoc basis and, therefore, their status cannot be 100% at par with permanent employees.
Even if it is presumed for the sake of argument that since the petitioners are continued since 1982 on the same post as ad hoc employees therefore they should not be depraved of the status of permanent employee as the proof reader working in Government press then also in view of the affidavit in reply filed on behalf of respondents it is apparent that for the appointment of proof readers in the Government press there are separate recruitment rules known as "Proof Readers Recruitment Rules, 1976" and after undergoing the process of recruitment rules including passing of prescribed test he person can be appointed as proof reader in the Government press.
So far as the petitioners are concerned, they have been appointed through Employment Exchange and no recruitment rules are pro voiced.
Further, the nature of work of the proof reader in the Government press is a continuous and arduous and the proof readers in the Government press have to send the material directly to the press ant the work undertaken by the petitioners is subject to supervision and control of Research Assistant, Assistant Director and Deputy Director of the office.
9.
Under the circumstances, I am of the view that considering the scheme of recruitment rules for proof reader working in the Government rules for proof reader working in the Government press and considering the nature of work being discharged by the proof readers working in the Government press it cannot be said that the petitioners are doing the same type of work and the same quality and with same responsibility as it is being done by the proof reader working in the Government press.
In view of this, Mr. Tanna is not right in contending that the petitioners are doing same work of the same quality and with same responsibility as it is being done by the proof reader in the Government press.
Further, in view of separate recruitment rules for the post of proof reader in he Government press the contention of Mr. Tanna can not be accepted that the post held by the petitioners as proof refer in the census work is the same to that of the proof reader working in the Government press.
10.
In view of the above discussion.
Even if the contention of Mr. Tanna is accepted that petitioners should not be deprived of their legitimate right merely on the ground that in the appointment order it has been mentioned "ad hoc", the petitioners would not be entitled to invoke the principles of equal pay for equal work in view of the fact that the nature of duty, the quality of work and the post held by the petitioners are different than the proof readers in the Government press.
At this stage, it will be worthwhile to refer to the judgment of the Apex Court in the matter of State of Madhya Pradesh (1992 Lab IC 2418) (supra) wherein the Apex Court has held the principles of equal pay for equal work is not applicable where the distinction is based on qualitative difference in the functions and responsibilities.
In the present case as observed earlier the petitioners have failed to prove the status, the post, the nature and work and responsibilities are the same as that of the proof readers working in the Government press.
Therefore the petitioners are not entitled to invoke the principle of equal pay for equal work.
11.
In the result, the petition fails and is dismissed.
Rule is discharged.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.