VM Jain, J - This regular second appeal has been filed by the defendants, against the judgment and decree dated 642002, passed by the learned District Judge, whereby appeal was accepted, judgment and decree of the trial court were set aside and the suit of the plaintiff was decreed.
2.
Facts of the case in brief are that Jaswant Singh, plaintiff, filed a suit for mandatory injunction against defendants for directing the defendants to release the arrears of pay from 1181987 (from the deemed promotion of Lineman) till 4101994, to the plaintiff, which had wrongly been withheld by the defendants, vide impugned order dated 4101994 and that the plaintiff was entitled to get the arrears of full pay and allowances for the post of Lineman for the aforesaid period.
It was alleged that the plaintiff was eligible and entitled for promotion from the Post of Assistant Lineman to the post of Lineman on 1181987, as per policy of defendants.
It was alleged that the plaintiff was ignored from promotion for the post of Lineman illegally, while other similar situated persons were promoted on 1181987 from the post of Assistant Lineman to Lineman.
It was alleged that plaintiff made representation to the defendants for promotion w.e.f.
1181987 and also served legal notice.
It was alleged that after a gap of seven years, defendants promoted plaintiff from the post of Assistant Lineman to Lineman, vide impugned order dated 41091994, from the deemed dated i.e. 1181987 but imposed certain illegal conditions to the effect that the plaintiff will not claim arrears of pay from the deemed date of promotion to the actual date of joining as Lineman.
It was alleged that the said order dated 4101994 imposing those conditions was illegal and void.
It was alleged that the plaintiff was threatened and was asked by the defendants to submit affidavit to the effect that he should not claim arrears of pay from 1181987 to 4101994.
It was alleged that this action of the defendants was illegal and void, inasmuch as plaintiff could not be deprived of the emoluments for the senior post from the date of promotion.
It was accordingly prayed that defendants be directed to release the arrears of pay from 11101988 to 4101994 to the plaintiff, which had been wrongly withheld by the defendants vide order dated 4101994.
Said suit was contested by the defendants by filing written statement.
It was alleged that plaintiff was estopped by his own act and conduct to file the present suit.
It was alleged that plaintiff had submitted an undertaking on non-judicial stamp paper of Rs. 3/- (affidavit date 2971994, duly attested by Oath Commissioner) to the effect that he will not claim arrears of pay from deemed date i.e. 11101988 to the actual date of joining as Lineman.
It was alleged that as such office order dated 4101994 was passed for promotion of the plaintiff to the post of Officiating Lineman.
It was alleged that plaintiff was bound by his own undertaking.
It was also alleged that the plaintiff had himself submitted the affidavit dated 2971994 duly attested by the Oath Commissioner.
It was denied that the plaintiff was never threatened, as alleged.
It was alleged that the plaintiff had got the affidavit drafted, signed and attested at Mohindergarh.
On the pleadings of the parties, learned trial court framed various issues.
Both the parties led evidence in support of their case.
After hearing both sides, learned trial court dismissed the suit of the plaintiff, holding that the plaintiff was not entitled to claim arrears of pay from the deemed date of promotion i.e. 1181987 to the actual date of promotion.
The appeal filed by the plaintiff was accepted by the Distt.
Judge.
Judgment and decree of the trial Court were set aside and the suit of the plaintiff was decreed to the effect that the plaintiff was entitled for the arrears of pay w.e.f.
1181987, the deemed date of promotion, till 4101994 and defendants were directed to fix the pay of the plaintiff, taking the date of promotion as 1181987 and were further directed to release the arrears of pay within two months failing which, plaintiff was also entitled to the same along with interest @ 9% pa. Aggrieved against the same, defendants have filed the present regular second appeal in this court.
3.
Notice of motion was issued to respondent and records were also ordered to be summoned.
It was further directed that the appeal shall be finally disposed of at the motion stage itself.
4.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the record carefully.
In my opinion, the following substantial question of law is involved in this appeal :-  "Whether the plaintiff-respondent would be entitled to seek arrears of pay from the deemed date of promotion to the actual date of promotion, even when plaintiff had furnished affidavit of his own free will that he would not claim said arrears ?"
5.
Learned counsel for the defendants appellants submitted before me that in view of the affidavit submitted by the plaintiff respondent, he would not be entitled to claim arrears of pay from the deemed date of promotion to the actual date of promotion.
It was submitted that plaintiff had given said affidavit voluntarily and there was nothing to show that said affidavit was obtained by defendants by fraud, misrepresentation or coercion etc. On the other hand, learned counsel for the plaintiff respondent submitted before me that plaintiff respondent was entitled to the arrears of pay etc. from the deemed date of promotion to the actual date of promotion.
It was submitted that the plaintiff had submitted affidavit in question under coercion.
It was further submitted that plaintiff respondent was entitled to the arrears.
Reliance was placed on Satyapal Singh and others v. The State of Haryana and another, 1992(2) RSJ 377.
6.
After hearing counsel for the parties and after perusing the record, in my opinion, present appeal must be allowed and the judgment and decree passed by the lower appellate court must be set aside and the suit of the plaintiff must be dismissed.
7.
Exhibit D2 is the copy of the affidavit of Jaswant Singh, plaintiff.
The same is dated 2971994.
He had sworn the affidavit before Oath Commissioner at Mohindergarh.
As per said affidavit, it was alleged by Jaswant Singh, plaintiff that he was posted as Assistant Lineman and that he was due for his promotion as Lineman w.e.f.
1181987 as per his seniority and that he shall not claim "arrears of pay from that date but only claim seniority and pay fixation from the date of my promotion i.e. from the deemed date".
It was further alleged that his promotion and pay may be fixed accordingly.
It was after the plaintiff had furnished the aforesaid affidavit that the order dated 4101994, copy Ex.D1, was issued by the defendants, whereby Jaswant Singh, plaintiff, was promoted from the post of Officiating Assistant Lineman to the post of Officiating Lineman.
It was mentioned in the said promotion order that Jaswant Singh, plaintiff, had been promoted from the deemed date i.e. 1181987, but he shall have no claim to back wages except that his pay as Lineman would be fixed from the deemed date of promotion.
It was further ordered that Jaswant Singh, plaintiff, shall furnish undertaking that he will not claim arrears of pay from the deemed date of promotion to the actual date of joining as Lineman.
8.
In view of the affidavit, copy Exhibit D2, submitted by Jaswant Singh, plaintiff, giving up his claim for arrears of pay from the deemed of promotion to the actual date of promotion, in my opinion, plaintiff respondent would not be entitled to claim arrears of pay.
9.
Learned counsel for the plaintiff respondent submitted before me that plaintiff had submitted the aforesaid affidavit in pursuance of the letter dated 28.7.1994, copy Ex.D3, whereby the Chief Engineer had asked the Superintending Engineer that before considering the promotion, the official may be asked to submit affidavit that he will not claim any arrears of pay due to deemed date of promotion.
It was submitted that it was in pursuance of the aforesaid letter that the plaintiff had furnished the aforesaid affidavit and that the said affidavit was furnished by the plaintiff under coercion.
However, I find no force in this submission as well of the learned counsel for the plaintiff respondent.
Exhibit D3 is the copy of the letter written by the Chief Engineer, Haryana State Electricity Board, Delhi to the Superintending Engineer, Haryana State Electricity Board, Narnaul, in which the Chief Engineer had asked the Superintending Engineer that before considering the promotion from the post of Assistant Lineman to Lineman, the official may be asked to submit an affidavit that he would not claim any arrears of pay from the deemed date of promotion.
Admittedly, plaintiff was posted at Mohindergarh in those days.
Even the affidavit, copy Exhibit D2, was sworn by the plaintiff at Mohindergarh before the Oath Commissioner.
There is nothing to indicate that aforesaid affidavit was result of any duress or coercion from defendants.
If the Chief Engineer had asked the Superintending Engineer to ask the concerned official to submit an affidavit in this regard, it cannot be said that any coercion was applied or that the affidavit in question was the result of the said coercion.
As referred to above, letter copy Exhibit D3 was received by the Superintending Engineer, Narnaul, whereas the plaintiff had submitted the affidavit at Mohindergarh.
There is nothing to indicate that in what manner the Superintending Engineer at Narnaul had coerced the plaintiff at Mohindergarh to submit the affidavit in question.
Furthermore, at the most it could be said that plaintiff was asked to furnish the said affidavit.
Plaintiff could have refused to furnish the said affidavit and could have contested his case for promotion along with arrears of pay.
However, of his own free will, plaintiff had sworn affidavit at Mohindergarh and had furnished the same at Narnaul, and as a result thereof, Superintending Engineer, Haryana State Electricity Board, Narnaul had issued the promotion order dated 4191994, copy Exhibit D1.
In my opinion, it could not be said that the plaintiff had submitted the affidavit, copy Ex. D2, under any duress or coercion.
Oral evidence led by the plaintiff in this regard would not be enough to prove the allegations of coercion.
10.
Learned Distt.
Judge, while allowing the appeal, had placed reliance on a judgment of this court in CWP No. 14648 of 1996, titled as Mohinder Singh v. HSEB and another, decided on 971997, for holding that no such affidavit could have been obtained by the defendants debarring the plaintiff from claiming arrears of pay w.e.f.
from the deemed date of promotion.
I have gone through the judgment of this court, in Mohinder Singh's case (supra).
In the said case, there is nothing to indicate that petitioner had given any such affidavit.
On the other hand, Haryana State Electricity Board had issued an office order vide which the petitioner was promoted retrospectively as Junior Engineer.
However, it was stipulated in the order that no arrears of pay and allowances shall be granted for the period from the deemed date of promotion to the actual joining as Junior Engineer because they had not actually worked in the capacity of Junior Engineer.
It was on that account that this court had directed that the petitioner would be entitled to the arrears of pay and the Electricity Board was not entitled to withhold the same.
However, facts of the present case are entirely different, inasmuch as the order was passed by the defendants that the plaintiff would not be entitled to the arrears of pay on the ground that plaintiff had furnished an affidavit that he would not claim arrears of pay from the deemed date of promotion to the actual date of promotion.
Similarly, the law laid down in 1999(2) RSJ 377 (supra), relied upon by the learned counsel for the plaintiff respondent, in my opinion, would have no application to the facts of the present case, inasmuch as in the reported case as well there is nothing to indicate that petitioners had furnished any such affidavit, as was done by the plaintiff respondent in this case.
11.
In view of my detailed discussion above, in my opinion, plaintiff respondent would not be entitled to claim arrears of pay in view of the affidavit copy Ex.D2 furnished by him to defendants.
This is especially so when the plaintiff had failed to show that he had furnished the said affidavit as a result of fraud, mis-representation, coercion or undue influence.
Accordingly, I reverse the findings of the learned Distt.
Judge on issue No. 1 and hold that the plaintiff was not entitled to the relief of mandatory injunction.
12.
For the reasons recorded above, present appeal is allowed, judgment and decree passed by the Distt.
Judge are set aside and the suit of the plaintiff is dismissed with no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.