Swatanter Kumar, J - In this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner prays for issuance of an appropriate writ, order or direction quashing the impugned order Annexure P/1 dated 22nd December, 1988, vide which the element of pension has been stopped with effect from 17th February, 1998.
2.
Relevant facts are :- that the petitioner was enrolled in the Army in the regiment of Artillery on 24.2.1982 and was discharged from army service with effect from 1.6.1993 being placed in low medical category.
The petitioner was put in BEE (permanent) due to "Non specific poly arthritis disease and the disability of the petitioner was assessed at 30%.
On account of this disability the petitioner was granted Rs. 135/- per month as disability pension.
On 17th February, 1998, the petitioner was subject to Re-survey Medical Board which again adjudged the disability of the petitioner as 30%.
However, the disability pension element was discontinued.
The reason stated for such action was that disability of the petitioner was assessed less than 20% (i.e. 11-14%) by the concerned Defence Control, vide order dated 22nd December, 1998.
The petitioner preferred an appeal on 1st March, 1999, which was rejected vide order dated 14112000.
Thereafter petitioner served a notice upon the respondents through his counsel on 1792001, which was replied to vide order dated 24102001, giving rise to the present writ petition.
3.
Upon notice, the respondents filed a detailed reply, contending in terms of Regulation 173 of the Pension Regulation for the Army, 1961 Part-I, the disability has to be more than 20% or above and must be aggravated or attributable to army service.
Further the respondents have disputed the facts but only added that the petitioner was subject to Re-survey Medical Board and his disability was assessed 30% for ten years on 17th February, 1998.
However, Chief, CDA (P), Allahabad rejected the disability and assessed the same less than 20% for 5 years.
As a result of this, it is stated that the Appellate Medical Board assessed his disability at less than 20%, which was communicated to the Ministry and resultantly, the disability pension element has been denied to the petitioner.
It is further stated that the findings of the Re-survey Medical Board are commendatory in nature and Chief of CDA (P) can vary the same which is final pension sanctioning authority.
4.
From the above, it is clear that the facts are hardly in controversy.
The only question is whether CDA (P) Allahabad has the jurisdiction to vary the findings of the Re-survey Medical Board at its own ?
This question is no more res-integra and stands answered by number of judgments of this Court.
5.
In the case Ex-Sept Nachhattar Singh v. Union of India and others, 1999(3) SCT 344 (P&H) : R.S.J.
1993(3) RSJ 161, the Court held that CCDA could not sit in the judgment over the opinion of the Medical Board or Re-survey Medical Board afresh to know the extent of the disability.
6.
Similar view was taken in other case titled as Avtar Singh v. Union of India and others, 2001(4) SCT 528 (P&H) : 2001(3) S.L.R.
270 and it was held that the petitioner was not even examined by the respondents authorities before varying the extent of disability of the petitioner in that case and as such order of the respondents was held to be not proper.
7.
In the case of Ex-Sep. Jagmel Singh v. Union of India and others, 2000(3) SCT 265 (P&H) : Civil Writ Petition No. 12749 of 1998 decided on 1632000, this Court after referring various judgments held as under :-  "I have already noticed that the facts in the present case are hardly in issue and as far as the question of law is concerned that stood answered by the Division Bench of this Court in case of Amar Nath v. Union of India and others, 1998(2) SCT 609 (P&H) : 1998(1) All Instant Judgments 478, where the Court, after discussing the law in detail, held as under :- "Once this certificate was issued in favour of the appellant entitling him to receive the disability pension, this benefit could not have been withdrawn by the Controller of Defence Accounts (P), Allahabad on his own without holding appellate medical board in accordance with law.
Exhibit D.3 while rejecting the claim of the appellant referred to period of 10 years previous of 25.6.1988 and disability being less than 20%.
This was never put to the appellant prior to the passing of the order.
If the appellant was entitled to the benefit in accordance with the rules on the strength of the disability certificate Ex. P1, the appellant could not be divested of the same without following due process of law and after giving proper opportunity to the appellant which admittedly has not been in the present case.
The corollary to this main issue is as to whether the Controller of Defence Accounts (P), Allahabad at all was justified is assuming the jurisdiction which is not vested in it under the rules.
Under the relevant rules and instructions, the respondents have the authority to constitute an Appellate Board and disturb the findings arrived at by the first medical board which again was not done, it would be permissible to disturb the findings without taking recourse to the relevant rules and instructions governing the subject.
5.
In this regard, reference can be made to the judgment of a Division Bench of this Court rendered in C.W.P.
No. 17688 of 1996 Ex-sepoy Ujagar Singh v. Union of India and others, 2001(3) SCT 761 (P&H) : (Decided on 9101997) : 1997(4) R.S.T.
587 where this Court in somewhat similar circumstances, after discussing in detail the matter governing the subject held as under :-  "We are unable to see as to how the accounts branch dealing with the pension can sit over the judgment of the experts in the medical line and comment upon the extent of disability without making any reference to a detailed or higher medical board which can be constituted under the relevant instructions and rules by the Director General of Army Medical Core."
xx xx xx xx xx xx xx An identical stand was taken by the Union of India in the case of Mam Raj v Union of India, C.W.P.
No. 2302 of 1997 decided on 1091997 by this Court where this Court held as under :- "Instruction No. 27 under the head of "functions and responsibilities" of Appendix-II of these instructions at best empowers the Medical Authority so constituted to give its view about assessment of disablement restricted to the medical issues.
The Medical Board(s) views and findings could be subjected to an appellate view by the Director General, Armed Forces Medical Services whose view would be final.
Nothing has been brought on record before us which would show that subsequent to the Medical Board, as a result of which the petitioner was discharged from Army, was held by the competent authority and that gave any findings contrary to the view expressed by the earlier Medical Board."
xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx 6.
From the above settled principles of law, I have no hesitation in coming to the conclusion that the learned Courts below have fallen in error in coming to the conclusion that the Controller of Defence Accounts (P), Allahabad can disturb the findings of the Medical Board in the present manner.
Admittedly, no evidence has been brought on record much less an expert evidence recorded by the Medical Officer to show that the findings recorded by the Medical Board were incorrect factually or otherwise.
8.
In the present case, neither any document has been placed on record nor any produced before us which would show that Appellate Medical Board was constituted in accordance with rules or instructions in that behalf or such Board had examined the petitioner and there was compliance of principles of natural justice.
As already noticed, the Medical Board is constituted of number of doctors and even Medical Advisor to the CDA (A) may not be appropriate forum to alter the findings recorded by the Medical Board.
The findings of the Medical Board can only be disturbed by the Appellate Medical Board constituted under instructions No. 27, afore-noticed.
In fact, during the course of hearing, nothing was brought to our notice which can be stated to be even substantial compliance of the rules/instructions regulating the matter in controversy and further more principles of natural justice.
9.
In view of the above discussion, we have no hesitation in setting aside the order dated 22.12.1998, Annexure P/1 to the writ petition.
However, we grant liberty to the respondents to direct the petitioner to appear before the Re-survey Medical Board or Appellate Medical Board and assess his disability in accordance with the prescribed standard and law and in the event the petitioner is found to be suffering from disability to the extent of 20% or above, the respondents shall grant the petitioner element of disability pension within a period of three months from the date of pronouncement of this order.
Writ petition is, accordingly, allowed to the extent indicated above, with no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.