Dilip Kr.
Seth, J - In this petition the order dated 23rd November, 2000 by which the interim relief was granted has since been impugned.
Mr. Haradhan Banerjee, learned Counsel appearing for the petitioner points out that by virtue of the interim order the interim relief sought for in this writ petition has since been granted.
He further points out that in terms of Section 24 of the Central Administrative Tribunal Act, no application should be disposed of without giving notice to the opposite party.
According to him, in this case the interim order was granted without any notice to the opposite parties being the petitioner herein.
2.
The learned Advocate for the respondents/petitioners before the learned Tribunal, on the other hand, contends that the petitioners had knowledge of the proceedings and did not choose to appear until an adverse order was passed against them.
She further contends that a review application was filed and that too was rejected.
By reason of the said order the writ petition cannot be maintained, since they had already obtained the said order during the pendency of this writ petition.
She further points out from the materials placed before this Court that the Respondent State authorities had been repeating the same process depriving her clients from getting promotion.
The ad hoc promotion affects the right of the petitioners before the learned Tribunal in the matter of promotion.
She also points out that in the meantime pursuant to the order passed by the learned Tribunal, the petitioners herein have since been reverted to the original post.
Therefore, nothing remains to be decided in this application.
She further suggests that since the parties have appeared, the learned Tribunal can be directed to dispose of the matter at the earliest and in the meantime the interim order should not be interfered with.
3.
Mr. Saroop, learned Counsel appearing for the State respondents, on the other hand, points out that since direct recruitment is not being made, the administration is bound to give ad hoc promotion in order to carry on the administration.
Since the posts to which ad hoc promotion is given is within the 25 per cent quota of the direct recruits, therefore, candidates eligible for direct recruitment were selected.
According to him, if the period of qualifying services of the petitioners before this court is taken, in that event they would be senior to the petitioners before the learned Tribunal.
Therefore, there is no infirmity in the order by which such ad hoc promotion was given.
In deference to the order passed by the learned Tribunal the order of ad hoc promotion has since been recalled by an order dated 1st February, 2001.
But the said posts are lying vacant since no steps has been taken for filling up the same.
4.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties.
It appears that no steps are being taken for filling up the post by direct recruitment.
Therefore, all these controversies are being created.
It is expected that the respondents should take immediate steps for filing up the posts by direct recruitment in consultation with the UPSC as early as possible.
5.
Admittedly these posts are to be filled up by direct recruitment.
The private respondents herein cannot have any claim for promotion against these vacancies.
Out of the total strength of the post, 75% are meant for being filled up for promotion from among the diploma holders as well as degree holders.
The balance 25% is meant for being filled up by direct recruitment for which the prescribed qualification is a degree in Civil Engineering.
Therefore, the diploma holders cannot claim any right by way of promotion against these vacancies.
6.
If a particular qualification is laid down for a particular post, the same cannot be filled up, even by way of ad hoc promotion, by persons who do not possess the minimum qualification for the said post.
Pending filling up of the vacancies in such post by regular process of selection or recruitment, in administrative exigencies, such posts could be filled up on ad hoc basis only by persons having the requisite minimum qualifications, inasmuch as particular post may require a particular expertise which is expected of a duly qualified person satisfying the minimum requisite qualification and not otherwise.
7.
In the present case the minimum qualification being a degree, the diploma holders cannot claim any right to the posts, even by way of ad hoc promotion, in the absence of their having teen possessed of the minimum qualifications.
Thus it appears that no prima facie case appears to have been made out by the petitioner for an interim order.
8.
Be that as it may, it appears that this Court is now supposed to deal with the interim order only.
In view of the provisions contained in the Central Administrative Tribunals Act, this court has no jurisdiction with regard to the original matters failing within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal established under (sic).
Therefore, this Court is not supposed to enter into the merits of the case at this stage.
The only question that could be dealt with by this Court is only to find out as to whether in exercise of revisional jurisdiction this Court can interfere with the interim order granted.
9.
In order to grant an interim order the primary duty of the judicial or quasi judicial authority is to find out the prima facie case and the question of balance of convenience and inconvenience.
So far as prima facie case is concerned, it is already observed that the petitioners before the learned Tribunal have not been able to make out a prima facie case.
10.
Now let us examine the question of balance of convenience and inconvenience.
Admittedly the posts are vacant and are yet to be filled up.
Admittedly, the administration has to be run.
It cannot wait till the posts are filled up.
In administrative exigencies ad hoc arrangements can be made for running the administration.
It is the domain of the administrative authority of find out as to what class of people would be suitable for the purpose having regard to the job to be performed which requires a particular expertise which is expected from a duly qualified person having the minimum qualification.
The Court or the Tribunal cannot place itself into the shoes of the authority concerned.
At the same time the posts cannot be kept vacant at the cost of the administration.
Thus the balance of convenience and inconvenience is also not in favour of the petitioners before the learned Tribunal.
11.
However, the findings with regard to prima facie case and balance of convenience and inconvenience are tentative for the purpose of deciding the question at hand.
The learned Tribunal shall be free to decide the question on merit according to its own wisdom and discretion, without being influenced by any observation made in this order.
12.
Admittedly, by reason of the interim order the whole relief sought for in this writ petition has since been granted.
Even if a prima facie case is made out certain interim orders could be granted but not to the extent of granting the whole relief as has been held in the case of Bank of Maharashtra v. Race Shipping and Transport Co. Pvt. Ltd. and another, reported in 1995(2) R.R.R.
299 : 1995(3) S.C.C.
257.
13.
In the present case, it appears that the interim order has virtually disposed of the petition before the learned Tribunal.
We are not inclined to enter into the question as to whether notices were served or not or whether the petitioners had been waiting at the fence on fringe and watching the case.
The fact remains that the ultimate relief has since been granted by virtue of the interim order.
Therefore, without entering into the merits of the case, we hereby set aside the interim order by which the state respondents were directed not to extend the ad hoc promotion given to the petitioners.
The order that was passed on 1st February, 2001 was based on the interim order granted by the learned Tribunal.
Therefore, the State respondents should reconsider the same in the light of the order passed by this Court in this matter and pass appropriate order as they deem fit and proper, since the same becomes honest.
14.
In any event, admittedly, the ad hoc promotion is given against the 25 per cent quota of direct recruitment.
However, both the Diploma Holder and the Graduate Engineers are not entitled to get promotion to the post on the basis of the respective qualification as laid down in Rule 12 of the Recruitment Rules for the post of Assistant Engineer (Civil) in Andaman Public Works Department, though, however, the degree holders, if come within the age restriction, may be eligible for direct recruitment.
But in no event the diploma holders can claim any (?)
stable to the said posts.
15.
If the qualification as laid down in Rule 12 of the said Rules is taken, in that event the petitioners would be senior to the respondents herein.
Having regard to the Rule 12 of the said Rules, as has been placed before us, it appears that there are some prima facie substance in the contentions of Mr. Saroop.
Whether the petitioners are senior or not in terms of the qualification as laid down in Rule 12 is a matter of consideration that may be left with the Administration.
Mr. Banerjee, learned counsel for the petitioner's had also asserted with emphasis that the petitioners by reason of the said rules would be senior on account of the fulfilment of the eligibility criteria even though their total period of service may be less than that of the respondents therein.
But such consideration would be relevant for promotion against the 75% quota of promotional post but not for the 25% quota of direct recruitment posts.
We need not go into this question at this stage.
It may also be borne in mind that the Administration cannot run in void.
Therefore, the administration is entitled to give ad hoc promotion in order to continue to run the Administration.
16.
However, we make it clear that this order will not in any way prejudice the rights of the petitioners or the private respondents herein so far as their respective right to promotion within the 75 per cent quota or the petitioners' right to be recruited directly against 25 per cent quota, according to the respective eligibility.
At the same time, the petitioners herein shall not acquire any right on account of their ad hoc promotion or continuance thereof and no benefit out of such promotion would be available to them on any ground whatsoever when the question of regular recruitment in the post of Assistant Engineer or promotion against the 75% quota would be considered.
17.
In the result the writ petition succeeds, the interim order dated 23rd November, 2000 impugned in this writ petition is quashed.
Let a writ of certiorari issued accordingly.
Since the parties have already appeared let the petition before the learned Tribunal be disposed of as early as possible preferably within 30th June, 2001.
With the aforesaid observations this writ application is disposed of.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.