JS Narang, J - The plaintiff-appellant was working as Junior Compositor in the Punjab Government Press, Patiala.
He was elected as President of Punjab Govt. Press Workers' Union.
It is alleged that on account of his activities as President of the Union, a false case was fabricated and he was suspended on 18121970.
However, he was reinstated vide order dated September 13, 1974.
Thereafter, a fresh eqnuiry was ordered on May 15, 1974 and the plaintiff- appellant was served with a show cause notice accordingly.
An order dated December 15, 1975, was passed vide which it had been directed that the period of suspension of the plaintiff-appellant from December 18, 1970 to September 12, 1974, will remain as such and will not be considered for leave, increments and/or pension.
Yet another order dated December 15, 1975, was passed vide which one increment of the plaintiff-appellant was stopped for one year with future effect.
2.
The plaintiff-appellant filed a suit for declaration challenging both the aforesaid orders upon the pleas contained in the plaint.
3.
The State-defendants contested the suit and the pleas of the plaintiff- appellant have been emphatically denied.
However, the suspension and reinstatement has been admitted.
It is pleaded that the enquiry was held under the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 (hereinafter referred to as "the Rules").
It is further stated that the earlier enquiry was dropped as the enquiry officer did not supply the list of witnesses to the plaintiff-appellant.
It is also pleaded that the delinquent official had been paid the subsistence allowance during the period of suspension and that the suspension is not a punishment.
A show cause notice had been duly served upon the delinquent official for removal from service, which is one of the major punishments.
The delinquent official was given appropriate opportunity during the course of enquiry and he was afforded opportunity in pursuant to show cause notice.
It is upon consideration of the facts and figures relating to the service of the delinquent official, the punishment of stoppage of one increment with cumulative effect was awarded.
4.
The pleas of the state have been controverted by way of reapplication filed by the plaintiff-appellant.
Upon the pleadings of the parties, the issues had been struck and the parties had been given the opportunity to produce documentary as well as oral evidence in support of their pleas.
5.
The trial Court dismissed the suit vide judgment and decree dated August 6, 1979.
Being dissatisfied, an appeal had been filed before the lower appellate Court and that the appeal has been dismissed and the judgment and decree of the trial Court has been affirmed.
Being dissatisfied, the present appeal has been filed.
6.
Learned counsel for the appellant has argued that the Courts below have not appreciated the rules relating to payment of the allowances during the period of suspension and also when suspension is revoked.
Admittedly, the appellant had been suspended on December 18, 1970 and that the order of suspension was revoked and he was reinstated on September 13, 1974 and that the enquiry allegedly ordered had been revoked and that a fresh enquiry was ordered on May 15, 1974.
Resultantly, the cause of suspension did not subsist and that the order of reinstatement is silent about the payment of the wages after the suspension of the delinquent official had been revoked.
My attention has been drawn to rule 73 of the Rules which categorically requires that when an official is reinstated, the authority competent to order reinstatement shall make a specific order regarding the pay and allowances to be paid to the government employee for the period of his absence from duty including the period of suspension with specific mention whether or not the said period shall be treated as the period spent on duty.
In the absence of such specific order, such employee shall be entitled to full wages subject to the deductions relating to the allowances which have already been paid.
In the case at hand, no order has been passed as to whether the plaintiff- appellant has to be paid full wages during his suspension period by treating him to be on duty during that period.
It is argued that since nothing has been said and no such plea has been taken by the State, it was incumbent upon the State to have paid full wages and that revoking the order of suspension and not paying the wages for the said period as he has been reinstated and that upon enquiry, one increment has been stopped for one year with cumulative effect.
The impugned orders are hit by the principle of "double jeopardy".
A person cannot be subjected to two punishments.
For reference, it shall be apposite to notice the aforesaid rule, which reads as under :-  "73(1) When a Government employee, who has been dismissed, removed or compulsorily retired, is reinstated as a result of appeal, revision or review, or would have been so reinstated but for his retirement on superannuation while under suspension or not, the authority competent to order reinstatement shall consider and make a specific order - (a) regarding the pay and allowances to be paid to the Government employee for the period of his absence from duty including the period of suspension, preceding his dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement, as the case may be, and (b) whether or not the said period shall be treated as a period spent on duty.
(2) Where the authority competent to order reinstatement is of opinion that the Government employee, who had been dismissed, removed or compulsorily retired, has been fully exonerated, the Government employee shall, subject to the provisions of sub-rule (6), be paid his full pay and allowances to which he would have been entitled, had he not been dismissed, removed or compulsorily retired or suspended, prior to such dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement, as the case may be : Provided that where such authority is of opinion that the termination of the proceedings instituted against the Government employee had been delayed due to reasons directly attributable to the Government employee it may, after giving him an opportunity to make representation and after considering the representation, if any, submitted by him, direct, for reasons to be recorded in writing, that the Government employee shall, subject to the provisions of sub-rule (7), be paid for the period of such delay only such amount (not being the whole) of pay and allowances, as it may determine.
(3) In a case falling under sub-rule (2), the period of absence from duty including the period of suspension preceding dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement, as the case may be, shall be treated as a period spent on duty for all purposes.
(4) In cases other than those covered by sub-rule (2) including cases where the order of dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement from service is set aside by the authority exercising powers of appeal, revision or review solely on the ground of non-compliance with the requirements of clause (2) of Article 311 of the Constitution and no further inquiry is proposed to be held, the Government employee shall, subject to the provisions of sub-rules (6) and (7), be paid such amount (not being the whole) of pay and allowances to which he would have been entitled, had he not been dismissed, removed or compulsorily retired or suspended prior to such dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement, as the case may be, as the competent authority may determine, after giving notice to the Government employee of the quantum proposed and after considering the representation, if any, submitted by him in that connection within such period as may be specified in the notice : Provided that any payment under this sub-rule to a Government employee other than a Government employee who is governed by the provisions of the Payment of Wages Act, 1936 (Act 4 of 1936) shall be restricted to a period of three years immediately preceding the date on which orders for reinstatement of such Government employee are passed by the authority exercising the powers of appeal, revision or review, or immediately preceding the date of retirement on superannuation of such Government employee, as the case may be.
(5) In a case falling under sub-rule (4), the period of absence from duty including the period of suspension preceding his dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement, as the case may be, shall not be treated as a period spent on duty, unless the competent authority specifically directs that it shall be so treated for any specific purpose : Provided that if the Government employee so desires such authority may direct that the period of absence from duty including the period of suspension preceding his dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement, as the case may be, shall be converted into leave of any kind due and admissible to the Government employee.
Note :- The order of the competent authority under the preceding proviso shall be absolute and no sanction of the higher authority shall be necessary for the grant of - (a) extraordinary leave in excess of three months in the case of a temporary Government employee; and (b) leave of any kind due in excess of five years in the case of a permanent and quasi permanent Government employee.
(6) The payment of allowances under sub-rule (2) or sub-rule (4) shall be subject to all other conditions under which such allowances are admissible.
(7) The amount determined under the proviso to sub-rule (2) or under sub-rule (4) shall not be less than the subsistence allowance and other allowances admissible under rule 72.
(8) Any payment made under this rule to a Government employee on his reinstatement, shall be subject to adjustment of the amount, if any, earned by him through an employment during the period between the date of removal, dismissal or compulsory retirement, as the case may be, and the date of reinstatement.
When the emoluments admissible under this rule are equal to or less than the amounts earned during the employment else where nothing shall be paid to the Government employee.
Note 1 - This rule is absolute and unconditional and so the question of lien does not arise in the case of a Government employee who is dismissed from service and is reinstated on appeal, revision or review when the period of unemployment between the date of dismissal and reinstatement is declared by the authority exercising the powers of appeal, revision or review as the period spent on duty.
Note 2 - Clause (b) or sub-rule (1) of this rule does not forbid the period spent under suspension being treated as leave, and it is open to the authority exercising the powers of appeal, revision or review to specify the proportion of pay and allowances to be paid as the leave salary which would be permissible, if the Government employee were on leave.
Administrative Instruction :- xxx xxx xxx xxx Note 3 - If no order is passed under sub-rule (5), directing that the period of absence by treated as duty for any specified purpose, the period of absence should be treated as "non-duty".
In such event, the past service (i.e. service rendered before dismissal, removal, compulsory retirement) will not be forfeited.
Note 4 - There is no bar to the conversion of any portion of a period of suspension into extraordinary leave.
In the case of persons who are not fully exonerated, the conversion of the period of suspension into leave with or without allowances has the affect of removing the stigma of suspension and all the adverse consequences flowing therefrom.
The moment the period of suspension is converted into leave, it has the effect of vacating the order of suspension, and it will be deemed not to have been passed at all.
Therefore, if it is found that the total amount of subsistence and compensatory allowances that an officer received during the period of suspension exceeds the amount of leave salary and allowances, the excess will have to be refunded and there is no escape from this conclusion."
7.
Reference has been placed upon the judgments of this Court in re; Malvinderjit Singh Dietitian v. State of Punjab and others, 1970 SLR 646 (P&H and in re : BD Singla v. Chief Engineer, 1991(2) SCT 319 (P&H) : 1991(2) SCT 319 (P&H).
8.
It has been further argued that not only any order has been passed as to how the said period has to be treated so far as payment of the wages is concerned.
It has been ordered vide one order dated December 15, 1975 that the period of suspension will not be considered for leave, increments or pension.
This in itself amounts to punishment being awarded to the delinquent official.
Apart from this, vide a separate order of the same date i.e. 15121975, one increment of the plaintiff-appellant had been stopped.
The perusal of both the orders shows that the plaintiff-appellant has been subjected to two penalties; (i) he shall not be entitled to count the period of suspension for the purpose of leave, increments or pension and (ii) one increment has been stopped for one year with cumulative effect.
De hors of the report of the enquiry, a delinquent official cannot be subjected to two punishments for one alleged offence.
My attention has also been drawn to the office order dated September 13, 1974 Ex.P11 vide which reinstatement of the plaintiff-appellant has been ordered.
It has been specifically mentioned that the orders regarding the treatment of suspension period will be issued in the light of the enquiry report.
Meaning thereby no order ha been passed with regard to withholding of the wages during this period.
The order reads as under :-  "Sarvshri Romesh Kumar, Junior Compositor and Khushbash Singh Press Daftri were placed under suspension with effect from 16121970 on account of the incident of man-handling by them an employee of the Government Press, Patiala and subsequently an enquiry has been instituted which is still in progress.
They are continuing under suspension for the last over 3 years.
In view of the prolonged suspension, a great hardship is involved as explained by the deputation of employees including one of the officials under suspension.
Therefore, keeping in view the hardship involved the matter has been examined and it is felt that both the officials may be reinstated without prejudice to the enquiry pending against them into the charges framed against them.
I, PS Walia, therefore, order the reinstatement of both Sarvshri Romesh Kumar and Khushbash Singh with immediate effect without prejudice to the enquiry pending against them and to the condition that they would extend full cooperation to the enquiry officer to enable him to complete the proceeding without delay.
Orders regarding the treatment of suspension period will be issued in the light of the enquiry report."
The impugned orders dated December 15, 1975, reads as under :-  "In continuation of this office order No. 2668/EA2/Admn:/Pb.
dated 1391974 reinstating Shri Ramesh Kumar and this office order No. 6568- EA2/Admn:/Pb.
dated 15121975 it is hereby ordered that the period of suspension from 19121970 to 1291974 will remain as such as will not account for leave, increment or pension."
Another office order of the same date i.e. 15121975, passed by the Controller Printing and Stationary Department Punjab, Chandigarh reads as under :-  "The reply dated 2291975 of Sh. Romesh Kumar who was suspended with effect from 18121970 vide office order dated No. 2196/EA/III/Admn.
/Pb.
dated 18121970 and reinstated with effect from 1391974, vide office order No. 2669/EAII/Admn./Pb.
dated 1391974 to the show cause notice dated 1.9.1975 has been considered.
The objections raised by him are not tenable as discussed below :- I.
Fresh enquiry could be held under the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 and it was necessary in the interest of natural justice and therefore, it was ordered.
II.
The instructions dated 2441972 issued by the Chief Secretary to Government, Punjab, only reiterate the provisions of the Constitution.
In the present case, the official has not been penalized before this order.
3.
No preliminary enquiries were held relating to the incident for which charges have been framed.
Therefore, there was no question of supplying copies of the preliminary report of other allied documents.
4.
Shri Raja Singh stated a different story in his previous statement and subsequently he resiled from that, which made his veracity doubtful.
Therefore, evidence could not be relied upon.
5.
The provisions of Rule 61 of the Industrial Disputes Rules, 1947, are not attracted in the circumstances of this case.
6.
The whole evidence on record both of prosecution and led in defence has been taken into consideration.
Taking into consideration the findings of the enquiry which has been legally held and the position as to the points raised by Sh. Romesh Kumar as discussed above and other facts into account, I feel that charges against Sh. Ramesh Kumar have been duly proved and he is responsible for gross misconduct.
However, taking into account his young age, acute unemployment and his family liabilities, I find that lesser punishment than that proposed in the show cause notice would meet the ends of justice.
Accordingly, I order that one next increment of Sh. Ramesh Kumar should be stopped for a period of one year with future effect."
9.
It has been further argued by the learned Counsel for the appellant that no opportunity had been granted to the delinquent official while passing an order in depriving him of his emoluments and pay during the period of suspension, as such, the order vide which the period of suspension has been ordered not to be taken into consideration for leave, increments or pension as violative of principles of natural justice.
Reliance has been placed upon a judgment of this Court in re : Rattan Singh Chaudhary, Executive Engineer, Punjab v. State of Punjab and another, 1971(2) SLR 692 (P&H) and Nand Kishore v. State of Punjab and others, 1983(1) SLR 207 (P&H).
10.
On the other hand, learned Additional Advocate General has argued that no right of the plaintiff-appellant has been jeopardised as the order of suspension is not a punishment and that the enquiry initiated earlier had been withdrawn on account of the lapse with which it suffered.
The order dated September 13, 1974, categorically mentions about the same and it is stated that without prejudice to the rights of the state for initiating a fresh enquiry the suspension order had been revoked.
It has been categorically provided in the order that the status regarding payment during suspension period will be issued in the light of the enquiry report.
As per the enquiry report, the delinquent official has been found guilty on all counts and that resultantly, the delinquent official was given a show cause notice and it is after hearing the official, the orders have been passed by the competent authority.
The period of suspension would not be treated on duty, resultantly, the delinquent official is not entitled to full wages and that the said period cannot be counted for the purpose of leave, increments or pension.
By a separate order, the punishment has been awarded by taking a lenient view and that one increment has been stopped for one year with cumulative effect.
The appellant has not suffered in any manner as he had been given the due opportunity to put forth his case before the competent authority.
11.
It is further argued that this Court cannot sit as a Court of appeal so far as quantum of punishment is concerned.
The enquiry does not suffer from any infirmities as due opportunity had been accorded to the delinquent official.
12.
After hearing the learned Counsel for the parties, I am of the view that the authorities have not passed any order with regard to the wages which are required to be paid to a delinquent official upon reinstatement as has been envisaged under rule 73 (supra) of the rules.
The perusal of the impugned orders show that the appellant had been subjected to two punishments i.e. the period of suspension is not to be counted for the purpose of leave, increments or pension and that over and above one increment has been stopped by a separate order.
The composite reading of the orders would mean that the period during which the appellant-plaintiff remained under suspension would not be counted for earning increment upto the date of his superannuation meaning thereby that this service shall not be counted for calculating the pension which the plaintiff-appellant may earn.
Likewise stoppage of one increment with cumulative effect would also mean the same that after having been reinstated one increment has been stopped which would not be counted for the purpose of calculation of the pension.
This approach of the authorities is not sustainable, the effect of both the orders would mean that the delinquent official has been subjected to double penalty for one and the same alleged offence.
13.
So far as punishment of stoppage of one increment is concerned, this Court cannot sit as a Court of appeal so far as quantum of punishment is considered.
No infirmity has been found so far as adhering to the procedure is concerned provided under the rules is concerned.
Resultantly, infliction of penalty by way of stoppage of one increment is upheld.
14.
However, the delinquent official cannot be subjected to any penalty in the absence of having been accorded opportunity of being heard before the order for not counting the suspension period for leave, increment or pension is concerned.
The effect of the order would be that any benefit which the delinquent official may have earned by counting the said period towards his service, the same has been denied.
15.
Resultantly, the appeal is partly accepted and the order vide which the period of suspension has been delinced to be counted for the purpose of leave, increments or pension is set aside.
Resultantly, the period of suspension shall be counted for all purposes and the appellant-plaintiff shall be entitled to all consequential benefits therefrom which shall be determined by the competent authority accordingly within a period of six months and the benefit so accrued shall be granted to the plaintiff-appellant within two months thereafter.
Since, no categoric order has been passed regarding the payment of the wages upon the order of reinstatement as envisaged under rule 73 of the rules, the appellant-plaintiff shall be entitled to full wages for the suspension period and the subsistence allowance etc. paid during this period shall be deducible accordingly.
The appeal stands partly accepted and is disposed of in the above terms.
Decree be drawn accordingly.
Appeal partly allowed.