Swatanter Kumar, J - The names of the petitioners were forwarded through the District Employment Exchange for the posts of Clerks and Steno-typists on contract basis and consolidated salary.
The petitioners were issued appointment letters initially appointing them for 89 days.
One of the letter of appointment has been annexed to the petition as Annexure P/1 dated 1281998.
The letter of appointment required the petitioners to sign a contract/agreement and they were entitled to casual leave in terms of the letter dated 761966.
Clauses (1) and (2) of the said letter read as under :-  i) That the contract is valid upto 89 days only or till the joining of a regular recommender of Haryana Staff Selection Commission, whichever is earlier.
ii) That the contract can also be terminated at any time during the tenure without giving any notice and without assigning any reason.
2.
Since then the petitioners have been working on the respective posts and have been continuing till date.
A Division Bench of this Court in CWP No. 6276 of 1994 Veena Rani v. State of Haryana quashed the appointment to the extent that they defined the services of the petitioners on contractual basis and on consolidated salary.
It was also so held by a Division Bench of this Court in the case of Rajni Bala (Miss) v. State of Haryana and others, 1996(1) SCT 390 (P&H) (DB) : 1996(1) S.L.R.
271 and Shamsher Singh and others v. State of Haryana and others, CWP No. 18237 of 1999, decided on 2871998.
The Special Leave Petition preferred by the State was also dismissed.
3.
Upon notice, the respondents filed short written statement wherein they have stated that the petitioners were appointed on contractual basis and even if their performance is good, still their services have to be terminated because they have completed 89 days of service.
It is also admitted that they were re-appointed on consolidated salary of higher amounts subsequently.
The case of Shamsher Singh (supra) is sought to be distinguished on the basis that the petitioners were appointed as Lecturers on ad hoc and terminated on availability of regular incumbent through the Haryana Public Service Commission.
4.
As is clear from the afore-noticed facts, there is hardly any controversy in regard to the facts of the case.
The short question that falls for determination before the Court is whether the afore-referred clauses of the letter of appointment are unjustifiable and are offending the principles of equality or are arbitrary.
This controversy again need not detain us any further as the afore-referred cases were followed by a Division Bench of this Court in the case of Seema and others v. State of Haryana and others, CWP No. 13058 of 1999, decided on 472000.
In this judgment, the Division Bench relied upon the judgments of the Supreme Court in the case of Polu Ram and another v. State of Haryana and others, CWP No. 18835 of 1997, decided on 1741998, and held as under :  "The petitioners further relied upon a decision of this Court in CWP No. 6147 of 1998, Sanjay Mehta and others v. State of Haryana and others alongwith three connected writ petitions decided on 1111999, wherein similar relief as extended to the petitioners in Shamsher Singh's case (supra), was given and it was observed that the payment of salary in the regular pay scale shall be made only after and in accordance with the decision of the Apex Court.
During the course of arguments, learned State counsel has stated at the bar that the SLP in Shamsher Singh's case (supra) has since been dismissed implying thereby that the stay against the payment of regular pay scale is no more in operation.
The case of the present petitioners is fully covered by the decision in Shamsher Singh's case (supra) and they are also entitled to the same relief.
In the result, all the four writ petitions are allowed.
The appointment order of the petitioners to the extent that it was on contractual basis is quashed.
The respondents are directed to permit the petitioners to continue in service till such time the regular lecturers join after due selection by the Haryana Public Service Commission and further to grant the petitioners the pay scales which are being given to the regular lecturers with effect from the date they were appointed with all consequential benefits.
No order as to costs."
5.
Some part of the above relief granted needs to be clarified in terms of Full Bench decision of this Court in the case of Vijay Kumar and others v. State of Punjab and others, 2001(2) SCT 694 (P&H) (DB) : 2002(1) SLR 694, where it was held that the persons who were doing functions and duties identical to the other persons similarly situated as a part of the same cadre would be entitled to equal pay for equal work.
The expression, "equal pay for equal work" would mean minimum of the pay scale with dearness allowance and not the same amount in the regular pay scale as a regular employee was receiving.
The Full Bench while relying upon the judgments of the Hon'ble Apex Court held as under :-  "In view of our detailed discussion above, we answer the question formulated in the reference order as under :- "The petitioners, who are working as Ledger Clerks, Ledger-keepers, Pump Operators, Mali-cum-Chowkidars, Fitters, Petrol Men and Surveyor etc., and are satisfying the afore-stated essential ingredients, are entitled to the minimum of the pay scale (basic pay and dearness allowance alone) admissible to their counter-parts working on regular basis in the same department."
6.
In the present case it is not disputed that the petitioners were appointed through proper channel of appointment though on contractual basis.
The clause that their services can be terminated at any time without notice is a clause, which, on the face of it, is arbitrary and offends the constitutional protection available to a person.
7.
Furthermore, it is not disputed before us even during the course of arguments that the Government is taking steps to make regular appointments Thus, we see no reasons why the petitioners, who are working for a considerable period on contractual/ad hoc basis should be replaced by any group of ad hoc of contractual employees.
It is also not the stand of the Government that they do not have any work.
On the contrary, it is specifically stated that the regular appointments to these posts are likely to be made in due course.
If that be so, the State would suffer no prejudice if the petitioners are permitted to continue to work in terms of the letter of appointment with the clause of termination being deleted therefrom till regular incumbents join the posts in accordance with rules.
8.
The petitioners would be entitled to get minimum of the pay scale with dearness allowance as afore-referred and the respondents are directed to consider the case of the petitioners and pass appropriate orders granting them the requisite relief.
In view of our discussion above, the writ petition is allowed to the limited extent afore-noticed without any order as to costs.
Petition allowed.