Dalveer Bhandari, J (Oral) - The 22 petitioners have filed this petition before this Court with the prayer that they have been working for several years and even after completion of several years of satisfactory service they have not been regularized.
2.
This court issued a show cause notice to the respondent on 3051997.
In the counter affidavit filed by the respondents, it is denied that they (respondents) did not heed to the request of the petitioners for regularisation of their services.
It is also incorporated that the fact is that the process of regularisation had already been started by placing the proposal in Standing Finance Committee of the Institute held on 2021996 which was already conveyed to the petitioners on 30996.
It is also mentioned that on 211997 this court directed the respondent-institute that services of the Casual Labourers be regularised within two months from 211997 when the respondents lawyer had informed the court that decision has already been taken by the respondents to regularise the services of 25 casual labourers (22 have approached this court and 3 of them did not approache).
3.
By the order dated 21.2.1907, the services of 25 daily wagers who had been working for a long time were regularised by the respondents.
4.
The short remaining grievance of the petitioners is that they have been denied consequential benefits and were not regularised from the dates of their respective appointment with the respondents.
Annexure P-3 is the list of the petitioners which is indicative of their dates of appointment with the Institute.
Correctness of this has not been disputed by the respondents.
This includes all the petitioners before this court.
The respondents could not point out any valid reason which impelled the respondents not to give consequential benefits of regularisation from the dates of their appointment.
5.
Dr. Surat Singh, the learned counsel appearing for the respondents, has placed reliance on the Constitutional Bench judgment of the Supreme Court titled Direct Recruit Class II Engineering Officers Associations & Ors. v. State of Maharashtra & Ors. reported as 1990(2) SCR 900.
Their Lordships of the Supreme Court clearly held that :  "The period of continuous officiation by a government servant, after his appointment by following the rules applicable for substantive appointments, has to be taken into account for determining his seniority; and seniority cannot be determined on the sole test of confirmation, for, confirmation is one of the inglorious uncertainties of government service depending neither on efficiency of the incumbent nor on the availability of substantive vacancies."
6.
In the instant case, the petitioners were validly appointed as daily wagers and continued in that position for several years and served the respondents to their entire satisfaction.
After the orders of this court, their services were regularised but they were not given the benefit of service from the dates of their appointment.
7.
Learned counsel appearing for the respondents has placed on record the "Scheme for Grant of Temporary Statute and Regularization of Casual Workers" prepared by Department of Personnel & Training and adopted by the respondent- institute.
Even in this scheme it is not mentioned that the benefit should not be given from the date of appointment.
8.
In view of the settled legal position, which has been crystalised in number of cases, the petitioners are entitled to get benefit of regularization from the dates of their appointment with the respondent-institute.
The respondents are accordingly directed to grant this benefit to the petitioners forthwith.
9.
No further orders are necessary in this petition and this petition is accordingly disposed of.
Petition allowed.