MM Kurnar, J - This is a writ petition against order dated 2692000 passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal Chandigarh Bench (for brevity, the Tribunal) vide which OA No. 188-PB of 1998, filed by the petitioner was dismissed.
Another prayer made by the petitioner is for setting aside order dated 10.
112000 passed by the Tribunal in review application No. 59 of 2000.
2.
The facts :  The Commissioner, Customs and Central Excise, Chandigarh (for brevity, `the Commissioner') sent requisition inviting the names of suitable persons from different Employment Exchanges to fill up posts of Sepoys.
The name of the petitioner was sponsored by the Employment Exchange to the Commissioner along with many other candidates from different Employment Exchanges.
On the asking of the Commissioner, the petitioner appeared for physical test/interview on 1571997 along with all the relevant documents.
The claim of the petitioner is that he belonged to OBC category and his performance in physical test as well as in the interview was commendable.
However, his name did not figure in the list of selected candidates displayed on the notice board by the Commissioner.
The petitioner discovered some fraud by the candidates in getting their names sponsored from various Employment Exchanges.
He alleged that fake recommendations were procured and sent at the instance of some of the candidates.
He served a legal notice on the Commissioner, disclosing the illegality committed during the selection process and also alleged that against the reserved category of OBC, his claim was meritorious as against those of the selected candidates.
When no action was taken on his legal notice and the representation made by him, he filed OA No. 188-PB of 1998.
Before the Tribunal, the stand taken by the respondents was that some of the names sent by the Employment Exchanges were bogus.
In para 4(ii) of the written statement, respondents No. 1 to 3 admitted that certain bogus lists purported to have been sent by Employment Exchanges were received and the services of persons selected from those lists were terminated.
The names of such candidates have been given in the aforementioned para of the written statement.
3.
Some of the candidates, whose selection and appointment were cancelled, challenged the termination of their services, before the Tribunal in OA No. 20/CH of 1998 and their application was dismissed on 832000 on the principal ground that the lists of names sponsored by the Employment Exchanges received by the Commissioner were bogus.
It is further pertinent to mention here that the whole selection was cancelled by the Commissioner.
On the basis of the stand of the respondents in the written statement, the original application of the petitioner was dismissed on 2692000 vide impugned order.
4.
After the dismissal of the original application, the petitioner filed a review application stating therein that the statement made by the respondents that the whole selection has been cancelled was incorrect.
It was alleged that no persons, who were selected on the basis of the physical test and interview on 1571997, were still continuing to hold the posts of Sepoy.
In paragraph 4 of the review application, the names of 6 out of those 9 persons, were given.
Paragraph 4 ofthe review application reads as under :  That it is pertinent to mention here that out of selected candidates on the basis of interview held on 1571997 at least 9 persons are still in job.
Name of six persons are given below for kind perusal of this Hon'ble Court :  Despatch No. and date Name of Candidate Place of work at present posted 2271997. i) 2871 Sher Singh Chd.
Admn.
Commissioner Excise-I ii) 2874 Daljit Singh -do- iii) 2879 Balbir Singh -do- iv) 2881 Pawan Kumar Attari Amritsar v) 2885 Ravinder Kumar Chd.
Admn.
Commissioner Excise-I vi) 2886 Surinder Kumar -do- Further total selection list is attached as Annexure RA-1 for the kind perusal of this Hon'ble Court."
However, without going into the merits of the review application, the Tribunal dismissed the same on 20112000 by observing that it does not fall within the scope of Section 22(3) of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 (for short, 'the Act') read with Order 47 Rule 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure (for brevity, 'the Code').
5.
Aggrieved by order dated 2692000 of the Tribunal passed in the original application and order dated 20112000 passed on the review application, the petitioner has filed the present writ petition.
In paragraph 10 of the writ petition, a categorical stand has been taken with regard to those 9 persons who are still continuing in job on the posts of Sepoy.
In the corresponding para 10 of the written statement filed on behalf of respondents No. 1 to 4, it is admitted that 7 persons are still continuing on the posts of Sepoy with the respondents.
In respect of the candidate, who was selected against the reserved category of OBC, namely Sh. Ramesh Dutt, it is stated that he had assured the Interview Committee that he belonged to OBC category and even his services were terminated on account of the fact that the list sent by the Employment Exchange where his name figured, was found to be bogus.
Aggrieved against that order, Sh. Ramesh Dutt had challenged his termination along with others in OA No. 20-CH of 1998, which was dismissed on 832000.
6.
We have heard Sh. SP Laler, learned counsel for the petitioner, Sh. Sanjay Goyal, learned counsel for respondents No. 1 to 4 and Sh. NDS Mann, Deputy Advocate General, Punjab, learned counsel for respondent No. 5.
7.
Sh. SP Laler, learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that the stand taken by respondent Nos. 1 to 4 at the time of deciding the original application on 2692000 was patently misleading and erroneous, in-as-much as, the whole selection, was not cancelled as was stated before the Tribunal.
The learned counsel pointed out that it is admitted position that certain candidates are continuing in service as has been conceded in para 10 of the written statement.
On this ground alone, the learned counsel submitted that the orders of the Tribunal passed on 2692000 and 2011.
2000 are liable to be quashed.
He further submitted that on a scrutiny of record, the respondents themselves found that the list of candidates sponsored by various Employment Exchanges were bogus.
Moreover, the claim of some of the selected candidates had been adjudicated by the Tribunal in OA No. 20-CH of 1998, which was dismissed on 832000.
In view of these facts, no candidates, who have been selected on the basis of the physical test and interview held on 15871997, should be allowed to continue.
The learned counsel maintained that the respondents made misleading statements before the Tribunal.
8.
Sh. Sanjay Goyal, learned Counsel for the respondents No. 1 to 4 was not able to explain as to how some of the persons mentioned in paragraph 7 to the written statement are being allowed to continue contrary to the stand taken before the Tribunal.
The learned counsel was also unable to explain the misleading statement made before the Tribunal.
9.
We have thoughtfully considered the respective submissions of the learned counsel for the parties and are of the view that this writ petition deserves to be allowed.
It is obvious that the impugned orders of the Tribunal are palpably erroneous.
We are also of the view that the observation of the Tribunal about the scope of review under Section 22(3) of the Act are not in consonance with law.
Section 22(3) of the Act reads under :  "22.
(3) A Tribunal shall have, for the purposes of [discharging its functions under this Act], the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), while trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely -  (a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;  (b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;  (c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  (d) subject to the provisions of Sections 123 and 124 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), requisitioning any public record or document or copy of such record or documents from any office;  (e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or, documents;  (f) reviewing its decisions;  (g) dismissing a representation for default or deciding it ex parte;  (h) setting aside any order of dismissal of any representation for default or any order passed by it ex parte; and  (i) any other matter which may be prescribed by the Central Government."
A perusal of the above provisions makes it clear that the Tribunal has been vested with the power to review its decision in the same manner as a Civil Court under the Code.
Under Order 47 Rule 1 of the Code it is expressly provided that from the discovery of new and important matter or evidence, which was not within the knowledge of the applicant or could not be produced by him at the time of decision, a review of the judgment is competent.
Order 47 Rule 1 of the Code reads as under :  "ORDER XLVII Review  1.
Application for review of judgment.
- (1) Any person considering himself aggrieved -  (a) by a decree or order from which an appeal is allowed, but from which no appeal has been preferred,  (b) by a decree or order from which no appeal is allowed, or  (c) by a decision on a reference from a Court of Small Causes,  and who, from the discovery of new and important matter or evidence which, after the exercise of due diligence, was not within his knowledge or could not be produced by him at the time when the decree was passed or order made, or on account of some mistake or error apparent on the face of the record, or for any other sufficient reason desires to obtain a review of the decree passed or order made against him, may apply for a review of judgment of the Court which passed the decree or made the order."
From a plain reading of the above mentioned provisions, it becomes crystal clear that the Tribunal has failed to exercise its jurisdiction which were vested in it.
On that ground alone, orders dated 2692000 and 20112000 are liable to be quashed.
10.
There is another aspect of the matter.
The source of making appointment to public offices cannot be confined to Employment Exchanges, although it was laid down by the Supreme Court in Union of India and others v. N Hargopal and others, 1988(1) S.L.R.
5 that filling of the notified vacancies in Government Departments by candidates sponsored by the Employment Exchanges was lawful and not violative of Article 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
However, in Excise Superintendent Malkapatna, Krishna District A.P.
v. KBN Visweshwara Rao and others, 1996(6) SCC 21, their Lordships of the Supreme Court held that restricting the selection only to the candidates sponsored by Employment Exchanges was not proper and the principles laid down in N Hargopal's case (supra) would offend the equality clause of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
Therefore it required that the posts must be filled up not only from the candidates sponsored by the Employment Exchanges but also by inviting applications through Advertisement or other modes from the candidates available in the open market.
Paragraph 6 of the judgment in the case of Excise Superintendent (supra), which represents the opinion of their Lordships, reads as under :-  "Having regard to the respective contentions, we are of the view that contention of the respondents is more acceptable which would be consistent with the principles of fair play, justice and equal opportunity.
It is common knowledge that many a candidate is unable to have the names sponsored, though their names are either registered or are waiting to be registered in the employment exchange, with the result that the choice of selection is restricted to only such of the candidates whose names come to be sponsored by the employment exchange.
Under these circumstances, many a deserving candidate is deprived of the right to be considered for appointment to a post under the State.
Better view appears to be that it should be mandatory for the requisitioning authority/establishment to intimate the employment exchange and employment exchange should sponsor the names of the candidates to the requisitioning departments for selection strictly according to seniority and reservation, as per requisition.
In addition, the appropriate department or undertaking or establishment should call for the names by publication in the newspapers having wider circulation and also display on their office notice boards or announce on radio, television and employment news bulletins; and then consider the cases of all the candidates who have applied.
If this procedure is adopted, fair play would be subserved.
The equality of opportunity in the matter of employment would be available to all eligible candidates."
For the reasons stated above, the writ petition is allowed.
Orders dated 2692000 and 20112000 are quashed with costs of Rs. 5,000/- which shall be payable by respondents No. 1 to 4 and the case is remanded back to the Tribunal for its decision on merits.
Petition allowed.