Swatanter Kumar, J - The petitioner in this writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India prays for issuance of an appropriate writ, order or direction and particularly a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to regularise the services of the petitioner as per policies of the Government dated 731996 and 1831996, annexed to the writ petition as Annexures P/2 and P/3 respectively.
The petitioner joined the Public Works Department (Buildings and Roads) Rohtak Circle, under the Executive Engineer of the said department as workman peon on 771990.
According to the petitioner her services were terminated illegally and without complying with the provisions of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act on 30101991.
The petitioner served a demand notice and the competent Government made a reference in regard to the alleged illegal termination of services of the petitioner by the respondents.
2.
The Presiding Officer of Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Rohtak, pronounced his award on 3041997 granting reinstatement of the petitioner to service with continuity of service and also granting 70% of the back wages.
With these directions, reference was answered and returned for execution.
The petitioner was reinstated in service.
The Haryana Government formulated and declared a policy for regularisation of its casual daily rated workers on 731996, which was further modified by the policy of 1831996.
Under this policy the persons who had completed three years of services as on 3111996 were entitled to regularisation.
The claim of the petitioner for regularisation was not accepted by the respondents despite service of a legal notice through counsel by the petitioner on 1562001, thus, compelling the petitioner to file this petition.
3.
Upon notice, the respondents filed detailed reply, but the only objection taken in the written statement is that the petitioner did not complete 240 days in each year and she does not satisfy the other conditions stipulated in these policies.
The other facts, as pleaded by the petitioner, are not disputed.
4.
In view of the admitted facts, a limited controversy falls for consideration before this Court.
According to the workman, she has worked for more than 240 days and would be deemed to have continued in service as a result of award in her favour immediately preceding the relevant year for regularisation i.e. 1996.
According to the respondents, as she was not physically present at the site, she cannot get the benefit of working for 240 days and consequential regularisation in service.
5.
It is not disputed that the award in favour of the workman dated 1041997 had attained finality and had been duly implemented by the parties.
Once an employee is given continuity in service with back wages and is reinstated, a deemed legal fiction of being in service arises in favour of that workman.
This controversy need not detain us any further particularly in view of Division Bench judgment of this Court in the case of Deep Chand v. State of Haryana and others, 1995(4) SCT 31 (P&H) : CWP No. 14165 of 2001, of even date, where the Court held as under :-  "..........Once the Labour Court granted reinstatement with continuity of service, the necessary consequence thereof would be that the petitioner would be deemed to be in service for the period in question.
It is a deemed fiction of law that the period in face of such award would have to be treated as a period actually spent on duty.
Initially, the services of the petitioner were wrongly terminated by the respondent-State and Subsequently the State compelled him to remain out of service for no fault of the workman.
Even after the award of the Labour Court, the petitioner was not permitted to join the duty.
In other words, the petitioner was not physically present at the work as a result of action of the respondents and no fault was attributable to the petitioner on any ground whatsoever.
The physical absence of the petitioner from duty was result of compulsion of the petitioner and not his choice.
In these circumstances we are unable to sustain the reasons given in the impugned letter that the petitioner was not entitled to regularisation because he did not physically work during the period in question.
The learned counsel for the State was unable to support his argument by any precedent or documents to show that the petitioner was called upon to join his duties."
6.
Once the Court finds it as a matter of fact that services of the employee were wrongly terminated, who in the eyes of law, would be deemed to be in service, cannot be even deprived of his back wages or arrears of salary subject to just exceptions and the law of limitation.
The consequences of setting aside an order of dismissal or termination gives rise to a consequential relief of reinstatement and payment of back wages as a necessary corollary to the setting aside of such order.
As a logical consequence of this declaration (award), it is manifest that the petitioner would be entitled to the benefits or reliefs which are consequential to grant of such relief.
(In this regard reference can be made to a Full Bench judgment of this Court in the case of Radha Ram v. Municipal Committee, Barnala and another, 1983(1) Services Law reporter 151 and the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of State of Madhya Pradesh v. State of Maharashtra, 1977(2) SCC 288.)
7.
To hold that an employee who holds an award of reinstatement with continuity of service in his favour, was not physically present at the site and, thus, not entitled to the relief of regularisation under the policy of the Government, would tantamount to frustrating the judicial pronouncements, more particularly a judgment which has attained finality inter se the parties to the lis.
Thus, we see no reason to uphold the objection taken by the State for denying the relief of regularisation to the petitioner.
It is not disputed that petitioner was appointed in the department and continued to work and thereafter would be deemed to have been in the services as a result of the award dated 1041997.
8.
For the reasons afore-stated we direct the respondents to consider and grant the relief of regularisation to the petitioner in terms of its policies dated 731996 and 1831996 annexed as Annexures P/2 and P/3 to the writ petition.
The writ petition is allowed in above terms, however, leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.