RL Anand, J - The petitioners are the Senior and Junior Translators working in Haryana Vidhan Sabha Secretariat, Chandigarh and they have filed the present writ petition against the respondents seeking the directions that respondents be directed to grant the pay scales of Rs. 1640-2900 + Rs. 80/- as special pay to the Senior Translators and Rs. 1400-2600 + Rs. 40/- to the Junior Translators as per recommendation made by the Fourth Central Pay Commission.
In the alternative, the petitioners made a prayer that they should be granted the pay scale of Rs. 1600-2600 as is being paid to the Translators working in the office of Legal Remembrancer Haryana and Agriculture Department of Haryana with effect from 111986.
2.
The case set up by the petitioners is that petitioners No. 1 to 3 are working as Senior Translators while petitioners No. 4 and 5 are working as Junior Translators in the Haryana Vidhan Sabha Secretariat.
The essential qualifications for the post of Junior Translators are Graduate with Hindi as one of the elective subjects and for Senior Translators Graduate with Hindi as one of the elective subjects with five years experience as Junior Translator in the Haryana Vidhan Sabha Secretariat.
The job of the petitioners is to translate into English all the notices of questions, resolutions, adjournment motions, privilege motions etc. and also to translate into Hindi of all the lists of business of the House.
The petitioners allege that the 4th Pay Commission recommended the pay scales of Rs. 1649-2900 for the Senior Translators and Rs. 1400-2600 for Junior Translators.
The State of Haryana accepted the recommendations and revised the pay scales of the employees working in the State of Haryana vide Notification dated 2941987 but the petitioners were not granted the pay scale of Rs. 1640-2900 + Rs. 80/- special pay and Rs. 1400-2600 + Rs. 40/- respectively but they were granted pay scale of Rs. 900-1500 + Rs. 40/- as special pay and Rs. 1400-2600 + Rs. 80/- as special pay to the Junior Translators/Senior Translators respectively.
The same pay scale has been granted to the Clerks/Assistants in the State of Haryana.
The petitioners made a representation on 2961987 that their counter parts working in the Central Government Offices are getting the pay scale, claimed in the writ petition and, therefore, they should also be placed in the grade of Rs. 1640-2900 for Senior Translators and Rs. 1400-2600 for Junior Translators.
The matter was referred to the Anomaly Committee.
The petitioners appeared before the Commission but to no effect.
It was also alleged by the petitioners that Deputy Chief Minister who was holding the port-folio of Finance Minister made a statement in the budget speech to the effect that the State of Haryana had accepted the revision of pay scales as recommended by the 4th Central Pay Commission and that the State of Haryana had granted to all its employees the pay scales which were being given to their counter parts working in the Central Government.
It was also declared by the Finance Minister that there were certain categories which have not been granted an identical pay scales to their counter-parts but their cases have been referred to the Anomaly Committee.
Thus, the first ground made out by the petitioners is that since the recommendation of the 4th Central Pay Commission has been accepted by the Haryana Government and it has been made applicable to the other employees of the Government of Haryana, therefore, the petitioners cannot be discriminated in the grant of the scale of Rs. 1640-2900 for Senior Translators and Rs. 1400-2600 for Junior Translators when their counterparts in the Central Government are getting these scales.
It violates the principles of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
3.
The second ground made out by the petitioners is that the qualifications, duties and responsibilities of the petitioners are the same as being performed by their counter-parts working in the various departments like the Office of Legal Remembrancer, Haryana and Agriculture Department, Haryana but inspite of the fact that the qualifications, duties and responsibilities are the same, the petitioners are not being paid the same pay scales as are being given to Senior and Junior Translators working in the office of LR Haryana and Agriculture Department.
Now the State of Haryana has revised the pay scales of Assistants/Senior Scale Stenographers to Rs. 1600-2660, therefore, the petitioners should be given this grade of Rs. 1600-2660.
This is the alternative plea of the petitioners.
It was also pleaded by the petitioners that the Speaker, Haryana Vidhan Sabha, has recommended to the State Government the pay scales of Rs. 1649-2900 for Senior Translators and Rs. 1400-2600 for Junior Translators but in spite of the recommendation this benefit is not being extended to the petitioners.
With this background, the petitioners have claimed the higher pay scale as stated above.
4.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
A joint written statement was filed on behalf of respondents No. 1 to 3.
It was contended that it is inherent administrative power of the State Government to prescribe and grant the scales of pay to any cadre governed by separate set of statutory rules, keeping in view the financial constraints, its repercussions on other cadres, hardship involved and so many other factors having bearing on the overall revision of scales of pay etc.
The consideration of higher educational qualifications is not the sole criteria for grant of higher pay scale.
The State Government in order to determine the revised pay scales which should be made applicable to various categories of employees of Haryana Government appointed an officers committee consisting of Chief Secretary, Financial Commissioner (Revenue), Financial Commissioner (Plainning) and Financial Commissioner (Finance Deptt.).
While considering the applicability of Central Government Scales in Haryana the committee observed that there are considerable variations in the system adopted by the Central Government and the existing system in the State Government.
Basic differences arise as the job content and the qualifications vary even in such cases where designations are similar.
The central Government pay scales were revised from 200 CPI to 608 CPI while the State Government pay scales were fixed at 320 CPI.
Besides the Central Government had allowed two instalments of interim relief to its employees on 1683 and 131985.
The committee also realised that Central Government had given revised pay scales to its employees on the basis of recommendations of the 4th Pay Commission, keeping in view the existing parities between services, posts and scales of pay etc. there in the Central Govt. which does not exactly fit into the existing relativities between the services, posts and scales as they exist in the State Government.
The Committee used the recommendation of the 4th Pay Commission as the guide-line by recommending the pay scales of the State Government.
Incidentally, there had been a parity of pay scales of Assistants with Senior Translators.
Incidental parity does not mean that these posts have been declared at par for all times to come as the State Govt. is competent to grant different pay scales to each category borne on distinct cadre and governed by separate set of statutory rules.
5.
On merits, it was the stand of the respondents that the State Government adopted the Central pattern with some deviations.
The committee observed that there are considerable variations in system adopted by the Central Government and the existing system in the State Government.
The basic differences arise as the job content and qualifications vary even in such cases where the designations are similar.
Junior Translators working in Haryana Vidhan Sabha Secretariat were getting the scale of Rs. 110-225 plus Rs. 25 S.P.
prior to 1.4.1979, Rs. 400-660 plus Rs. 20/- S.P.
w.e.f.
1479 and the Senior Translators were getting Rs. 225-500 prior to 1.4.1979 and Rs. 525-1050 plus Rs. 40 S.P., with effect from 1.4.1979.
The replacement scale of Rs. 950-1500 plus Rs. 40/- SP to Junior Translators and replacement scale of Rs. 1400-2600 plus Rs. 80/- SP has rightly been granted to the Senior Translators of Haryana Vidhan Sabha.
No injustice has been done to the petitioners.
They are getting the pay scales as were applicable to Assistants/Clerks w.e.f.
111986.
The representations of the petitioners were considered by the Government and these were rejected as these had no worth.
The Central pay scales were adopted by the State Government with deviations and variations.
The petitioners are not entitled for the pay scales as were applicable to the counter-parts of the Central Government.
The petitioners cannot claim parity with the Translators of the LR office and the Agriculture Department by virtue of their qualifications.
With this broad defence the respondents have prayed that the writ petition may be dismissed.
6.
I have heard Shri PS Patwalia, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioners and Shri Vijay Dahiya, learned AAG, Haryana, appearing for the respondents and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
7.
The case set up by the petitioners is that since the Haryana Government has adopted the recommendation of the Central Pay Commission and it has made applicable to the other employees of the Government of Haryana, therefore, the petitioners cannot be discriminated.
In support of his contention, the learned counsel for the petitioners has relied upon a judgment dated 1381996 given by the Hon'ble Division Bench in C.W.P.
No. 4206 of 1995, The Haryana Civil Secretariat Personal Staff Association v. State of Haryana.
Reliance was also placed on (sic) 1973 SC 1088, Parshotam Lal v. Union of India, which judgment incidentally was also relied upon by the Hon'ble Division Bench in C.W.P.
No 4206 of 1995.
Further, reliance was also placed by the learned counsel for the petitioners on a judgment reported as 1977 All India Service Law Journal 523, D Rama Rao and others v. Union of India and another.
8.
I have considered all the cited judgments and the facts of this case and in my considered opinion this writ is totally devoid of any merit.
The Haryana Government, of course, did not constitute its own Pay Commission but had decided that they will take into consideration and try to adopt as far as possible the recommendations of the Central Pay Commission.
Ultimately, it is for the Government to see whether a particular set of posts as in the present case (Senior Translators and Juniors Translators) can be equated with the Senior Translators and Juniors Translators working in the Central Government or in the other departments of Haryana.
It has been observed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in (sic) 1989 SC 19, State of UP and others v. JP Chaurasia and others that "More often functions of two posts may appear to be the same or similar, but there may be difference in degrees in the performance.
The quantity of work may be the same, but quality may be different that cannot be determined by relying upon averments in affidavits of interested parties The equation of posts or equation of pay must be left to the Executive Government.
It must be determined by expert bodies like Pay Commission.
They would be the best judge to evaluate the nature of duties and responsibilities of posts.
If there is any such determination by a Commission or Committee, the Court should normally accept it.
The Court should not try to tinker with such equivalence unless it is shown that it was made with extraneous consideration".
9.
In the light of the ratio of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in JP Chaurasia's case (supra), the petitioners have not been able to show that the grades made applicable to their posts have been applied for some extraneous consideration.
In 1992(2) SCT 301 (SC) : 1992(2) SLR 82, Secretary, Finance Department and others v. The West Bengal Registration Service Association and others, it was held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court that equation of posts and determination of pay scales is the primary function of the executive and not of the judiciary and, therefore, ordinarily Court will not enter upon the task of job evaluation which is generally left to expert bodies like the Pay Commissions etc.  10.
With regard to equal pay for equal work the case of the petitioners is not covered with the translators in the office of the LR Haryana or Agriculture Department on account of their qualifications.
The learned counsel for the petitioners has not been able to show that the Government of Haryana has ever declared that whatever grade is recommended by the Central Pay Commission, will be automatically applicable.
A grade recommended by the Central Pay Commission, of course, has been made applicable to the other employees of the Haryana Government depending on the exigency.
Rather in AIR 1973 SC 1088, Purshotam Lal and others v. Union of India and another, it was observed by the Supreme Court itself that government is not obliged to apply the recommendation of the Pay Commission in respect of all Government employees.
The granting of the higher pay scale to its different classes of employees depends upon many factors such as qualifications, nature of duties and working hours etc. We all know that the Session of particular Legislative Assembly sits twice, thrice or four times in a year.
The work-load of the post of Senior Translator or Junior Translator may vary from the work load of Senior/Junior Translators of the office of LR Haryana or any other departments.
All these matters have been gone through by the expert committee constituted by the Government after the receipt of the recommendations of the Pay Commission.
They were the best Judge.
No mala fide or extraneous reasons are involved on their part nor it is the case of the petitioners.
Case of equal pay for equal work is not made out.
In this view of the matter, I do not find any merit in this writ petition and the same is hereby dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.