SB Sinha, J - This appeal is directed against a judgment and order dated 3.9.1999 passed by a learned Single Judge of this Court in Writ Petition No. 62 of 1999 whereby and whereunder the writ application filed by the writ petitioner-respondent herein was allowed.
2.
The writ petitioner-respondent filed a writ application before this Court claiming, inter alia, the following reliefs :-  "(A) A writ in the nature of Mandamus directing the respondent authorities to show cause as to why direct payment system would not be implemented in the FCI Depot, Port Blair when notification is made by the Ministry of Labour, Government of India for prohibition of employment of contract labour under Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970 and FCI's own depots already brought under the direct payment system specifying the criteria for implementation of such system and if, the respondent authorities fail to show sufficient cause to the satisfaction of the Hon'ble Court, make the rule absolute.
(B) A writ in the nature of prohibition, prohibiting the respondent authorities especially the Senior Regional Manager, Hyderabad respondent No. 4 herein to give any effect or further effect of the tender dated 8699 or any other subsequent tender for handling and transportation of foodgrains for the FCI Depot.
Port Blair as your petitioners are continuously working since 15.10.94 till date and they have already given their willingness to negotiate on the matter.
(C) A writ in the nature of Ceritorari directing the respondent authorities to transmit the case record including the notification by Ministry of Labour, Government of India for prohibition of employment of contract labour under Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970 before this Hon'ble Court so that after perusing the same conscionable justice may be rendered to your petitioners directing the respondent authorities for introduction of Direct Payment System at FCI, Dolly Gunj, Port Blair."
The basic fact of the matter is not much in dispute.
The petitioner is a Co-operative Society.
A contract was awarded in its favour by the Food Corporation of India for handling and transportation of foodgrains for a period of two years.
The said agreement having been entered into on 411997 admittedly is not in force.
3.
According to the petitioner, the Management of the Food Corporation of India issued a declaration that they would bring all the workers under the direct payment system.
But despite the same a tender was floated wherein the petitioner also participated.
It is the contention of the petitioner that by a latter dated 5.11.97, 14 depots of several districts including Kakinada had already been brought within the purview of the `Direct Payment System'.
The further contention of the petitioner is that although Food Corporation of India, Port Blair is within the region of Kakinada, the said policy decision has not yet been implemented.
According to the petitioner, as the work of handling and transportation of food grains is perennial in nature, the respondent-appellant herein should adopt a uniform policy decision.
4.
Before the learned trial Judge several notifications had been produced.
Some of the said notifications were illegible but according to the learned trial Judge the substance of the said notification was that the Central Government in consultation with the Central Board prohibited employment of contract labour in the godowns and the depots of the Food Corporation of India specified in the schedule annexed thereto wherein the process, operation or work of handling of foodgrains including loading and unloading from any means of transport, storing and stocking is carried on.
5.
The learned trial Judge having regard to the provisions contained in Section 10 of the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970 as also the decision of the Apex Court in Air India Statutory Corporation v. United Labour Union, reported in 1979(9) SCC 377, to the effect that whenever a notification under Section 10 of the Act is issued, the contractor's labourers were to be absorbed automatically directed :-  "Since Labour Co-operative Societies were already working in the notified depots and they had maintained proper records in respect of EPF, Wagon, Identity Cards, Gate Entry Register etc., it has been decided that the workers already working there for the last three years and who had worked for at least 9 out of 12 months in the last year proceeding April, 1996 and whole EPF deductions were being made, will be extended the benefit of Direct Payment System.
Similarly in remaining notified owned depots out of the list at Annexure-II where `No work no pay'/Mate system was functioning, the same procedure may be adopted.
It may be ensured that no substitution or induction of fresh labour is made.
However, the actual requirement of labour for these depots will be assessed as per the norms to be finalised in due course."
The respondents were directed by the learned Judge to introduce the direct payment system in Port Blair within a period of six weeks.
6.
Admittedly before the learned trial Judge no notification under Section 10 of the Contract Labour (Regulation & Abolition) Act was produced in show that employment of contract labour has been prohibited in the godowns of the appellant at Port Blair.
The said Act deals both with the regulation and prohibition of contract labour.
Before a notification in terms of Section 10 of the said Act is issued, the appropriate government is required to form its opinion with regard to any or all the factors enumerated under sub-section (2) thereof.
Such notification must also be issued having regard to the number of workmen required to be employed on regular basis as envisaged under sub- section (4) of Section 10 of the said Act.
As indicated here-in-before, before a notification is issued, upon formation of the requisite opinion by the appropriate government consultation with the appropriate board is also required to be made.
7.
As far back as in 1974 the Apex Court in Gammon India Ltd v. Union of India, reported in AIR 1974 SC 960, categorically stated that after coming into force of the said Act it is the appropriate governments alone who can issue the notification prohibiting employment of contract labour.
8.
In absence of any notification, thus, no direction can be issued by the Court directing the Central Government to issue a notification in that regard, in terms of the decision of the Apex Court in Air India Statutory Corporation or otherwise.
It may be placed on record that the correctness of the said decision has been questioned in Bharat Petroleum's case as also Food Corporation's case and the matter has since been referred to a larger Bench.
Be that as it may, question of induction of a direct payment system has got nothing to do with issuance of a notification under Section 10 of the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, and consequent decision in Air India Statutory Corporation.
A direct payment system with regard to Contractor's labourer is also required to be made by the principal employer in terms of sub-section (4) of Section 21 of the said Act.
9.
However, if the appellant herein which is a State within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of India itself intends to abolish contract labour and carry out the works departmentally, no exception thereto can be taken.
If it intends also to introduce the direct payment system, no exception thereto can also be taken.
But with respect to the learned Judge, we are of the opinion that in the instant case neither Section 10 of the said Act nor the ratio in Air India Statutory Corporation can be said to have any application.
10.
The only relief, in the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case, which would be granted to the writ petitioners-respondents herein was to direct the Food Corporation of India to consider the case of the writ petitioners having regard to the allegations made in the writ application and that they are similarly situated to the other workers working in Kakinada District, and it is directed accordingly.
11.
We hope and trust that the appellant being a State within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of India would adopt a policy decision in a fair and reasonable manner and its action, having regard to Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India cannot be discriminatory.
We, therefore, allow this appeal and set aside the judgment passed by the learned trial Judge.
We dispose of the writ application by directing the appellant herein to consider the case of the petitioner at its earliest and preferably within a period of three months from the date of communication of this order and for the said purpose, if necessary, may give an opportunity of hearing to the representatives of the concerned workmen.
In the facts and circumstances of this case there will be no order as to costs.
PK Sen, J - I agree.
Appeal allowed.