RL Anand, J - This is a civil revision and has been directed against the order dated 2.3.1998 passed by Civil Judge (Junior Division), Patiala, who dismissed the objections of the petitioner to the execution filed by Hartej Singh decree-holder.
2.
Some facts can be noticed in the following manner :  Hartej Singh filed a suit for declaration that the order of termination dated 3171987 passed by Pepsu Road Transport Corporation (hereinafter called `the Corporation') is illegal, arbitrary, against the rules and he further sought declaration that he is entitled to reinstatement with consequential benefit and all other benefits in the matter of salary, increments etc. and a decree for declaration was granted by the trial Court on 10.8.1990 to the following effect : "In view of my finding on various issues, a decree of declaration that impugned order dated 3171987 passed by the Depot Manager, Pepsu Road Transport Corporation, Patiala-II vide which services of the plaintiff were terminated and order dated 25111988 passed by the Dy.
General Manager of PRTC vide which appeal filed by the plaintiff was dismissed, are illegal, null and void orders and plaintiff continues to be in service from the date of termination onward is passed in favour of the plaintiff and against the defendants with costs.
Further, plaintiff shall be entitled to interest @ 12% per annum on arrears of wages from the date of his termination till payment."
3.
This judgment and decree became final.
The plaintiff/decree-holders filed the execution before the Court.
During the pendency of the execution, some amount was paid to the decree-holder but he was not satisfied with the decree, as a result of that the executing Court framed the following issues :  1.
Whether any amount remains to be paid to the DH ?
If so to what extent ?
OPDH 2.
Relief.
4.
These two issues were disposed of by the executing Court i.e. Court of Additional Senior Sub Judge, Patiala vide order dated 1011995 and it was observed that the amount of increments still remains due to the decree-holder which is required to be paid by the judgment debtors.
This order dated 1011995 has not been challenged by the Corporation.
The controversy now is that when the plaintiff was in service i.e. prior to 3171987 the authorities of the Corporation passed various orders - dated 2451984, stopping one annual increment; dated 2661984, stopping two annual increments; dated 2251985, stopping one annual increment; dated 9101985, stopping one annual increment; dated 7101985, stopping six annual increments; dated 17.6.1986, stopping three annual increments and dated 2971986, stopping two annual increments.
5.
Now the stand of the objector is that various orders stopping the increments of the decree-holder were operative on 3171987 and these orders were not challenged by the decree-holder in the suit and, therefore, the Corporation is justified while calculating the arrears of the salary in pursuance of the judgment and decree to deduct all these amounts from the salary of the decree-holder and in this manner the decree has been satisfied.
It was further submitted by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the order dated 1011995 cannot become impediment in the way of the Corporation as this order has not adjudicated specifically about the fate of the stoppage orders of increments and moreover this order is without jurisdiction and the Corporation can always ignore it.
6.
On the contrary, the learned counsel for the respondent Mr. Palli submitted that the order dated 1011995 is a final order passed by the competent authority and no challenge has been given and now it is not open to the petitioner to raise any objection as agitated by Mr. Salil Sagar.
7.
After hearing the rival contentions of the parties, this Court is of the opinion that the petitioner has no case.
The plaintiff in the original suit has given a challenge to the order dated 3171987 and made a prayer that his termination order is against the law and he also prayed for consequential benefits.
In these circumstances, the defendant-petitioner ought to have raised the plea in the written statement in alternative that in case the suit of the plaintiff is decreed, the judgment-debtor (defendant/petitioner) is entitled to the adjustment of these amounts.
It is to the judgment-debtor to raise the plea that the suit of the plaintiff cannot succeed vis-a-vis the orders which were passed starting from 1984 onwards.
When this plea has not been taken by the judgment-debtor in the main suit, how they are entitled to raise this plea now at the belated stage.
The things do not rest here.
When some payment was made to the decree-holder, still the judgment-debtor could raise the plea before the executing Court that it is entitled to deduct the amount under the various orders by which the annual increments of the plaintiff were stopped.
No such plea was taken.
The order dated 1011995 has not been challenged by way of appeal or revision by the judgment-debtor and now it is too late for them to agitate this issue.
It is settled principle of law that the executing Court cannot go behind the decree.
All orders passed prior to 1987 now cannot be made a shield to the claim of the plaintiff/decree-holder.
8.
Resultantly, I do not find any merit in this revision and the same is hereby dismissed with no order as to costs.
Revision dismissed.