RL Anand, J - This is a Civil Revision and has been directed against the order dated 251997, passed by the Additional District Judge, Jalandhar, who dismissed the appeal of the General Manager, Punjab Roadways, Jalandhar Depot against Shri Mukhtiar Singh, Conductor, who filed an application under the Payment of Wages Act, 1936.
2.
Brief facts of the case are that respondent, Shri Mukhtiar Singh, committed fraud with the Department involving monetary loss to the State.
According to the respondent, the proper procedure for awarding the punishment, has not been adopted.
3.
Notice of the application made by Shri Mukhtiar Singh was given to the State.
Reply was filed and according to the petitioner, respondent Shri Mukhtiar Singh committed a huge fraud with the Department involving monetary loss to the State and that in awarding the substantive sentence, the proper procedure was adopted and no miscarriage of justice has occurred.
4.
The Authority under the Payment of Wages Act, allowed the application of Shri Mukhtiar Singh vide order dated 1531993 after framing the following issues :  1.
Whether the deductions are authorised ?
OPR 2.
Whether the application is barred by limitation ?
OPR 3.
Relief.
Aggrieved by the order of the Authority, under the Payment of Wages Act, the Department filed the appeal before the Court of Additional District Judge, Jalandhar, who dismissed the appeal for the reasons given in the impugned order.
In this manner the present revision has been filed by the Department.
6.
Notice of the revision was given to Mukhtiar Singh, who has not appeared in spite of service and was proceeded ex parte.
7.
I have heard Ms. Gurveen H Singh, learned AAG, Punjab, appearing on behalf of the petitioner and with her assistance have gone through the record of this case.
8.
In the view of this Court, both the Courts below have not rightly appreciated the point involved in the controversy.
The common case is that Shri Mukhtiar Singh committed a fraud and he was proceeded departmentally and a punishment was imposed upon him.
He approached the Authority under the Payment of Wages Act, in order to claim his wages.
The State took the stand that it had awarded the punishment according to the prescribed procedure.
9.
The point which was required to be decided by the Courts below was that whether any wages was due to Shri Mukhtiar Singh or not ?
Rather, both the Courts below have assumed the jurisdiction of civil Court by stating that the impugned order of punishment passed on Shri Mukhtiar Singh is not in accordance with law.
This decision of the Courts below is beyond their jurisdiction.
10.
While dealing with the scope and power of the Court under the Payment of Wages Act, 1936, it was held in 1996(2) All Instant Judgments 652 : 1998(2) SCT 98 (P&H)(DB), Gurdev Singh v. State of Haryana that in the proceedings held under the Payment of Wages Act, 1936 substantive order of punishment cannot be set aside.
The remedy of Shri Mukhtiar Singh against the passing of that order lies somewhere else.
He should have approached the civil Court for setting aside the minor penalty imposed by the Department.
The Authority under the Payment of Wages Act had no jurisdiction to set aside the impugned order passed by the Department.
11.
In this view of the matter, the present revision is allowed and both the orders of the Courts below are hereby set aside.
No order as to costs.
Revision allowed.