NK Sodhi, J - Challenge in this writ petition is to the order dated June 1, 1999 passed by the Secretary to Government of Punjab, Department of Public Works (B&R Br.)
whereby respondents No. 2 to 4 have been promoted to the posts of Chief Engineers.
The primary grievance of the petitioner who is working as a Superintending Engineer in the department is that even though he was eligible and more suitable than the respondents his claim for the post has not been considered although he was within the zone of consideration.
The relevant facts necessary for the disposal of this writ petition may first be noticed.
2.
The petitioner is working as a Superintending Engineer in the Punjab Public Works Department (B&R) at Chandigarh.
He is an ex-Army officer.
There has been a long drawn out litigation amongst the officers of the Punjab Service of Engineers Class II & I regarding their inter-se seniority and some writ petitions were filed in the year 1984 by some ex-Army officers in this Court claiming benefit of the instructions issued by the State of Punjab in the year 1964.
The writ petitions were allowed by a learned single Judge of this Court and in letters patent appeals that order was slightly modified.
Two sets of special leave petitions were filed in the Supreme Court, one by the ex-Army officers and the other by the civilian officers.
The SLPs filed by the civilian officers were allowed and those filed by the ex-Army officers dismissed with the result that the writ petitions filed in this Court were dismissed by the Supreme Court solely on the ground of laches without examining the merits of contentions raised in the writ petitions.
The SLPs were disposed of by the Supreme Court on 11121997.
After the decision of the Supreme Court, the department refixed on 241999 the inter-se seniority of the ex-Army officers and the civilian officers in the Punjab Service of Engineers Class-I service.
A copy of this seniority list is Annexure P-1 with the writ petition.
In this seniority list, the name of the petitioner is shown at serial No. 26 whereas respondents 2, 3 and 4 have been placed at serial Nos. 21, 24 and 22, respectively.
3.
Three posts of Chief Engineers fell vacant and those were to be filled up by promotion.
For this purpose a Departmental Promotion Committee (DPC, for short) was constituted which in its meeting held on 1641999 selected respondents 2 to 4 for the posts and recommended their names for promotion against two posts available for promotion.
It may be mentioned that Shri DP Bajaj respondent was already on deputation with the Punjab Health System Corporation and was given pro forma promotion.
A copy of the proceedings of the DPC was produced before us by the learned Deputy General at the time of arguments and a persual thereof shows that in the agenda circulated for that meeting the names of only 5 officers had been included for consideration for promotion to the available posts.
However, taking note of the relevant guidelines issued by the Government of India which, according to the petitioner, had been adopted by the State Government, the DPC sent for the names of next three officers and their names were circulated amongst the members of the Committee.
The additional three names included the name of the petitioner.
The proceedings of the DPC further show that despite considering the claim to the petitioner as well, the members thereof evaluated the merits of the first 5 officers only and recommended names of respondents 2 to 4 for promotion of the posts of Chief Engineers.
Petitioner was not evaluated by the DPC.
The case of the petitioner is that had his confidential record been evaluated by the DPC his grading would have been higher than that of respondents 2 to 4 which would have entitled him to get promotion in preference to these respondents.
He had specifically averred that even as per the evaluation made by the DPC, respondent No. 2 was not eligible for promotion as his grading was only `Good' whereas according to the criteria laid down in the guidelines for promotion the grading should have been at least `Very Good'.
Thus, the grievance of the petitioner is two-fold, (i) that despite falling within the zone of consideration his confidential reports were not evaluated thereby depriving him of his right of consideration for promotion, and (ii) that an ineligible person namely respondent No. 2 was promoted.
4.
In response of the notice issued by this Court the respondents have filed their written statements.
Counsel for respondents 2 to 4 seriously controverted the averments made by the petitioner and it was pleaded on their behalf that the guidelines referred to by the petitioner were not applicable as those had not been adopted by the State Government.
It is also averred that even if the guidelines were to be taken as adopted by the State Government, these only provide for the maximum number of persons who had to be considered for promotion against the three vacancies and since in the present case respondents 2 to 4 who are eligible had been found suitable, there was no need for the DPC to consider the other candidate lower than them in the list of seniority no matter they fell within the zone of consideration.
It was also contended by the learned counsel for respondent 2 that this respondent was eligible for promotion as the criteria for promotion had been relaxed by the DPC and as per the relaxed criteria a candidate with even `Good' grading was eligible for promotion.
5.
The State of Punjab has also filed its written statement and contested the writ petition.
The learned Deputy Advocate General during the course of arguments took the stand that the guidelines issued by the Government of India in regard to DPCs and related matters stand approved and adopted by the State Government and that the DPC was required to follow the same.
He produced before us a circular letter No. 3/64/94-3PP/25643 dated November 21, 1995 in which it is clearly mentioned that the aforesaid guidelines issued by the Government of India had already been adopted by the State of Punjab.
Not only this, he also produced before us a circular letter No. 13/3/99-3PP-I/11889 dated October 1, 1999 issued by the Joint Secretary, Personnel to all the Financial Commissioners, Principal Secretaries and Administrative Secretaries to the Government of Punjab pointing out that the criteria for promotion as laid down by the Government of India was not being followed strictly by the DPCs and they were asked to ensure that the DPCs followed the procedure and the criteria scrupulously.
The learned Deputy Advocate General, however, sought to justify the selection of respondents 2 to 4 on the ground that since the DPC had found three officers suitable for promotion from the list of first five officers, it was not necessary for that Committee to evaluate the other officers who fell within the zone of consideration.
6.
We have heard counsel for the parties and are of the view that the writ petition deserves to succeed.
At the outset, we may mention that respondents 2 to 4 were promoted on the basis of seniority list dated 241999 prepared by the department after the decision of the Supreme Court referred to above.
The validity of this seniority list was challenged before us by Shri BK Thapar respondent in CWP 4713 of 1999.
The petitioner had also challenged the correctness of the seniority list in CWP 5910 of 1999.
CWP 4713 of 1999 filed by Shri Thapar was allowed by us on February 10, 2000 and the seniority list dated 241999 has been quashed with a direction to the State of Punjab to prepare a fresh seniority list in accordance with the direction issued by us.
Admittedly respondents 2 to 4 herein have been promoted on the basis of that seniority list which stands quashed and, therefore, their promotions cannot be sustained on this ground alone.
However, we are of the view that the present writ petition deserves to succeed also on the ground that the petitioner who should have been considered was not considered for promotion even if seniority list Annexure P-1 was to be the basis for promotion.
7.
The real dispute between the petitioner and respondents 2 to 4 before us is whether the guidelines issued by the Government of India had been adopted by the State of Punjab or not.
This issue should not detain us for long in view of the stand taken by the learned Deputy Advocate General and the two circular letters dated November 21, 1995 and October 1, 1999 produced by him which are taken on record.
As already observed, a perusal of these letters leaves no room for doubt that the guidelines issued by the Central government which were circulated by the Punjab government as per its letter dated November 23, 1990 stood adopted and that it was necessary for the DPC to follow them scrupulously.
In the letter dated October 1, 1999, the State Government had informed the Administrative Secretaries and Financial Commissioner to ensure that the DPCs follow these guidelines scrupulously.
We are, therefore, satisfied that the guidelines stood adopted by the State of Punjab and that the DPC was required to follow them in letter and spirit.
This conclusion of ours is further strengthened from the fact that the DPC in its meeting held on 1641999 had not only referred to these guidelines but in terms of para 6.1.1 thereof had sent for the names of three next officers for consideration for promotion though it did not evaluate them in terms of the guidelines and followed them more in their breach.
8.
Now let us examine whether the guidelines issued by the Government of India as circulated by the State of Punjab by its letter dated 23.11.1990 have been followed by the DPC in the instant case.
We may first refer to the relevant guidelines which are reproduced hereunder for facility of reference :-  "611 Where promotions are to be made by selection method as prescribed in the recruitment rules, the DPC shall, for the purpose of determining the number of officers who will be considered from out of those eligible officers in the feeder grade(s), restrict the field of choice as under with reference to the number of clear regular vacancies proposed to be filled in the year : No. of vacancies_____________________ No. of officers to be considered___________________________ 1 5 2 8 3 10 4 3 times the numbers of vacancies 6.2.2 In the case of each officer an overall grading should be given.
The grading shall be one among (i) Outstanding (ii) Very Good (iii) Good (iv) Average (v) Unfit 6.3.1 The list of candidates considered by the DPC and the overall grading assigned to each candidate, would form the basis for preparation of the panel for promotion by the DPC.
The following principles should be observed in the preparation of the panel :- (i) --- --- --- (ii) In respect of all posts which are in the level of Rs. 3,700- 5,000 and above, the benchmark grade should be `Very Good'.
However, officers who are graded as `Outstanding' would rank en bloc senior to those who are graded as `Very Good' and placed in the select panel accordingly upto the number of vacancies, officers with same grading maintaining their inter se seniority in the feeder post.
(iii) --- --- --- (iv) --- --- ---" A reading of the aforesaid guidelines leaves no room for doubt that for every 3 vacancies the DPC is required to consider 10 eligible officers from the feeder grades and restrict the field of choice to them.
Thereafter the DPC is required to evaluate their annual confidential reports and give a grading to each eligible officer as required by para 6.2.2.
This is necessary because the guidelines further provide that officers who are graded as "Outstanding" would mark en bloc senior to those who are graded `Very Good' and placed in the select panel accordingly up to the number of vacancies and the officers with same grading maintain their inter-se seniority in the feeder post.
In the case before us, it is common ground between the parties that the annual confidential reports of the petitioner were never evaluated by the DPC and he was not given any grading as required by para 6.2.2 of the guidelines reproduced above.
It is also not in dispute that the petitioner was one of the 10 candidates who fell within the zone of consideration for being considered for promotion for the 3 posts.
The argument of the learned counsel for the respondents that since the DPC had found respondents 2 to 4 suitable for the 3 posts as they were senior to the petitioner in the seniority list, it was not necessary for the Committee to consider any other name for promotion even if they all within the zone of consideration, cannot be accepted in view of the guidelines reproduced above.
The petitioner is justified in contending that if his service record had been evaluated and found `Outstanding' he would have not only been promoted to the post but would have ranked senior to respondents 2 to 4 who were otherwise senior in the seniority list.
In this view of the matter, the selection of respondents 2 to 4 has necessarily to be quashed on his score as well because the claims of other officers including the petitioner who fell within the zone of consideration, were not considered as envisaged in the guidelines.
This is a violation of Articles 16 of the Constitution.
9.
We also find considerable force in the argument of the petitioner that respondent 2 was not eligible for promotion since he was graded only as `Good' by the DPC as is clear from the proceedings which grading was lower than the benchmark grade of `Very Good' as prescribed in para 631(ii) of the guidelines reproduced above.
In terms of this para of the guidelines no officer with a grade below `Very Good' could be promoted.
It is true that the DPC in its meeting had relaxed the benchmark from `Very Good' to `Good' but this, in our view, could not be done because the State Government wanted the DPC to follow the guidelines scrupulously in their letter and spirit.
10.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed and the promotion of respondents 2 and 4 quashed.
Since the seniority list dated 241999 has already been quashed by us in CWP 4713 of 1999 and a direction therein issued to the State of Punjab to prepare a fresh seniority list in terms of the direction contained in our order, the promotions to the 3 posts of Chief Engineers will now have to be made on the basis of seniority list to be prepared by the State of Punjab.
In this view of the matter, we further direct that in order to avoid delay in promotions, fresh seniority list to be prepared within two months from today and promotions made to the posts of Chief Engineers accordingly within one month thereafter after considering the claims of all those who fall within the zone of consideration in terms of the guidelines.
There is no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.