ML Singhal, J - Facts.
Smt. Nirmala Devi is working as Clerk-cum-Cashier in Ambala-Kurukshetra Gramin Bank (hereinafter referred to as the Bank).
Vide order dater 12691, Shri S.K.
Aggarwal, Chairman (Disciplinary Authority) imposed punishment of stoppage of three increments with cumulative effect upon her.
She went in appeal.
Board of Directors of the Bank dismissed her appeal vide order dated 2.9.92 conveyed to her on 30.9.92.
She challenged the said orders through suit for declaration filed by her in the Court of Civil Judge, Junior Division, Ambala.
2.
It was alleged by her in the plaint that she was working at Kakar Majra Branch of the Bank in 1989.
She was suspended.
She was served with charge sheet dated 2661989 on the allegation that on 30589, she had left the branch and didn't attend the office and proceeded to Chandigarh for the training programme at Staff Training College, New Bank, Chandigarh without the permission of the Manager and without getting relieving order.
It was also stated in the charge sheet that she did not attend the special class held in the evening of 27th, 28th and 29th of May, 1989.
It was also stated in the charge-sheet that she tore off the slip which had been sent to the branch on 30589.
Allegation against her was that she was in the habit of leaving the branch before time and of coming late in the morning.
Further allegation against her was that she used to keep both the keys of the cash while working in Hamgola branch.
She filed reply to the charge sheet.
She was issued warning.
Her reply to the charge sheet was not found satisfactory and inquiry was ordered vide order dated 24789.
Inquiry Officer was appointed.
She was punished with the aforesaid punishment by the department saying that all the charges stood proved, vide order dated 12691.
It was alleged that enquiry officer acted irrationally, did not take into account the statements of witnesses and the plea put forward by her.
Authority took action against her.
Her appeal was dismissed without application of mind.
3.
Defendant-bank contested the suit of the plaintiff urging that full opportunity was given to her.
Reply submitted by her was considered by the Punishing Authority but was not found satisfactory.
Her appeal was rejected after considering every facet.
4.
On the pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed by the trial Court :  1.
Whether the orders dated 12691 and 30.9.92 are illegal, null and void ?
2.
Whether the inquiry regarding the charge-sheet was held according to the law ?
OPD 3.
Whether the suit is beyond limitation ?
OPD 4.
Whether the plaint is undervalued for the purpose of court fees and jurisdiction ?
OPD 5.
Whether this court has no jurisdiction to entertain and try this suit ?
OPD 6.
Relief.
5.
Civil Judge, Junior Division, Ambala vide order dated 29.8.98 dismissed the plaintiff`s suit in view of the finding that inquiry conducted by Inquiry Officer was in tune with law and procedure governing the conduct of such inquiries and also there was application of mind while the impugned orders were passed.
6.
Plaintiff went in appeal.
Her appeal was dismissed by Additional District Judge, Ambala vide order dated 111298.
7.
Still not satisfied, Smt. Nirmala Devi knocked the door of this Court through this regular second appeal.
8.
Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that charges Nos. 5 and 6 were the subject of previous charge sheet, which had been issued earlier.
She filed reply to that charge sheet vide letter dated 23189.
After considering her rely, warning was issued to her vide letter dated 27189 Ex.P1.
It was submitted that these two charges which had been disposed of earlier should not have been the subject matter of this charge sheet.
If the said two charges which were the subject of earlier charge sheet were included in this charge sheet and the Punishing Authority took into account these charges also while punishing her that will show non-application of mind on his part as also that she was subjected to punishment twice over for the same misconduct.
She could not have been punished twice over for the same misconduct in view of the provisions of Article 20(2) of the Constitution of India, which says that "no person shall be prosecuted and shall not be punished more than once."
There were five charges against her, which are couched in charge sheet Ex. P3.
One of the charges was that she possessed both the keys of cash and on 10189 despite instructions of the Chairman she did not hand over the keys of the cash to Jaljit Singh Supervisor.
It was also alleged in the charge sheet Ex.P3 that Chairman personally found her coming late to the Bank on 10189.
Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that memorandum Ex.P9 had been served upon her earlier.
She filed reply thereto.
After considering her reply vide letter dated 27189 the Staff Officer had issued her warning for being careful in future.
Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that when she had been punished earlier for coming late she could not have been punished for the same charge over again.
It was further submitted that Inquiry Officer was appointed by the Disciplinary Authority vide letter dated 19689, while the charge sheet was issued on 24689.
This shows that the matter stood prejudged and the action of the Disciplinary Authority was mala fide.
It was further submitted that Disciplinary Authority in the show cause notice Ex.P11 proposed the punishment without obtaining reply from her, which shows that the Disciplinary Authority was predetermined to punish her and issuance of show cause notice was a farce.
He drew my attention to ML Gera v. Chief Engineer, 1973(1) SLR 1076 (P&H).
9.
She was tried on the following charges :-  "On May 27, 1989 (Saturday), you were relieved from Kakar Majra branch to attend a training programme at STC, New Bank of India, Chandigarh, commencing from 29th May, 1989 (Monday).
Instead of reporting at Chandigarh, you came to branch and requested the Manager to allow you to join the office on the plea that your father was not well, which was acceded to by incumbent- in-charge.
On May 30, 1989 (Tuesday), you did not attend the office and later on it was noticed that you left for Chandigarh of your own for training without permission of the Manager and without getting relieved.
This was revealed when a chit to this effect had been delivered by someone to the Manager In the Training College too, it was observed by the Staff Officer that you did not attend the special classes held in the evenings on 27th, 28th, and 29th May, 1989 and left the college without proper permission.
Further, when explanation to your above said misconduct was called on 19689, you have been reported to tear off the slip which contained the message, after detaching the same from staff file of the branch and replaced with an application in the absence of the Manager on 13689 who had gone for recovery at that time, despite his clear instructions given a day before i.e. on 12689 for not doing such an act.
It has also been observed that you are in habit of leaving the branch much before the office hours and had become habitual late comer.
The undersigned personally found you coming late to bank at 1050 am on January 10 on his visit to the Hamgola Branch.
You are also alleged to possess both the keys of cash with you at B/o Hamgola which is a serious lapse on your part.
On 10th January, despite instructions from the undersigned to hand over the cash keys to Sh. Jaljit Singh, Field Supervisor, you remained adamant for not delivering them to the Officer and took more than 30 minutes in carrying out the Chairman's instructions.
As a result, the branch started its real function of transactions after 11 am"  10.
She was deputed to attend a training programme at Staff Training College, New Bank, Chandigarh where she was to report on 29th (Monday).
She was relieved on 27589 (Saturday) with a view to attend this training programme.
She did not report at the training programme at Chandigarh and instead went to the branch and asked the Manager to allow her to join the office saying that her father was not well.
On May 30, 1989 she did not attend office and later on it was noticed that she left for Chandigarh for training without the permission of the Branch Manager and without getting relieved.
This was revealed when a chit was delivered to the Manager.
In the training college also, she did not attend the special classes held in the evening of 27, 28 and 29 May, 1989 and left the college without proper permission.
When her explanation was sought on 19689 she was reported to have torn off the slip which contained the message after detaching the staff file of the branch and replaced with an application in the absence of the Manager on 13689 who had gone for recovery at that time despite his clear instructions given to her earlier for not doing such an act.
On 10th January despite instruction from the Branch Manager to hand over the keys to Jaljit Singh she remained adamant and did not deliver the keys to the said officer and took more than 30 minutes in carrying out the Chairman`s instructions.
11.
Court cannot substitute its own opinion whether charges are grave or mild.
It is for the Disciplinary Authority whether to view charges as grave or mild.
Similarly, the court cannot go into sufficiency or otherwise of the evidence on which Disciplinary Authority had acted upon to hold the charges as proved.
Inquiry Officer recorded evidence of both the Management as well as that of the delinquent official.
Delinquent Official was given an opportunity to cross-examine witnesses produced by Management.
She was also given an opportunity to produce her defence.
Inquiry Officer heard both the parties and recorded finding that she had left for Staff Training College, New Bank, Chandigarh on 30589 from the Branch office, Kakar Majra, without getting herself relieved.
She had been allowed to join duties by the Branch Manager on 29589 on her representing that as her father was ill, she could not attend training programme.
She should have left the branch office after getting relieved from the Branch Manager.
Charge of wilful defiance of the order of the Manager was an act of misconduct.
Inquiry Officer did not find charge No. 5 relating to absence without permission and her being not punctual in attendance as proved.
She was not awarded any punishment on that score.
If that was so, there was no prejudice to her if the said charge was included over again.
12.
Inquiry was quite in order and in tune with the law and procedure governing the conduct of inquiries.
It was an act of grave indiscipline on her part.
Indiscipline on her part was brought home to her through inquiry conducted by the Inquiry Officer in which she had been given full opportunity to defend herself.
There are concurrent finding of fact by both the courts below that she had been given full opportunity to defend herself during the inquiry and there had been no failure of justice to her.
For the reasons given above, this appeal fails and is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.