Harjit Singh Bedi, J. (Oral) - Petitioner Nos. 1 to 10 are students who were scheduled to take the 10+2 Examination privately in March/April, 1999, whereas petitioner Nos. 11 to 18 are Institutions imparting coaching in various subjects as per the syllabi of the respondent-Board for the +2 classes.
The respondent-Board issued a prospectus Annexure P-3 for the conduct of the Senior Secondary Examination Part-II (10+2) for the years 1998-99 and 1999- 2000 in which the conditions relating to the syllabi etc. were laid down.
Sub-clauses (g) and (h) of Clause 3 of the Regulations for Senior Secondary Examination defined "private candidate" and "School/College candidate".
It is the conceded position that petitioner Nos. 1 to 10 are private candidates.
The Board thereafter issued a circular (Annexure P-4) inviting candidates to submit their forms for the examination.
Petitioner Nos. 1 to 10 who were scheduled to submit their examination forms to take the examination in question as private candidate, were however informed that though their forms would be accepted, yet they would not be permitted to take the examination in any subject having practicals in the absence of a certificate as required under the Note below clause 6(b)(ii) of the Regulations.
This matter was conveyed by petitioner Nos. 1 to 10 to the other petitioners (i.e. 11 to 18).
The members of the Association of the private educational Institutions met the Chairman and the Secretary of the respondent-Board and submitted two representations dated 2781998 and 1691998, Annexures P-5 and P-6 respectively, pointing out that the Note aforesaid was impossible of compliance for the reasons given in the representation.
As no positive response was forthcoming from the respondent-Board, the present writ petition has been filed by the petitioners claiming that the requirement of a certificate as envisaged under the Note, was not called for as per the Regulations and was, in any case, not capable of compliance.
2.
On notice of motion, a reply has been filed by the respondent-Board and it has been pleaded that petitioner Nos. 1 to 10 who are candidates were bound by the Prospectus that had been issued and as Note below clause 6(b) clearly provided that they were required to submit a certificate showing their practical experience, the petitioners could not be permitted to take the examination without fulfilling this requirement.
The respondent has also placed reliance on a judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court reported as AP Christians Medical Educational Society v. Government of Andhra Pradesh and another, 1986(2) Supreme Court Cases 667 to contend that if the statute had laid down a particular provision, it was not open to the Court to pass a direction that the statute need not be complied with as that would be perpetuating an illegality.
It has also been pleaded that the rule in question had been introduced w.e.f.
the year 1993 and that the Board had been making efforts to get the same implemented since then.
3.
Mr. Rajiv Atam Ram, the learned counsel for the petitioner has made a three fold argument in the course of the hearing.
He has first urged that as per the provisions of the prospectus the petitioners were to submit a certificate showing that they had attended 75% of the practical classes in order to be eligible but as the course has started in July, 1998 and the last date for submission of the application forms was September, 1998 (whereas the classes were to continue till March, 1999), this certificate could not obviously be provided as the requisite number of practical classes could not be attended by that date.
He has also urged that a close examination of clause 6, dealing with the admission to be granted to private candidates, clearly revealed that the certificate envisaged in that clause was not to be given by a private candidate but was to be supplied by a candidate who was appearing through an affiliated school and for that purpose the Note Below Clause 6(b)(ii) would have to be read alongwith clause 6(a) and not with clause 6(b).
He has also urged that it was the admitted position that prior to 1993 there was no requirement for the provision of a certificate and though this clause had been introduced for the first time in 1993, it had not been enforced till the year 1998 and, in the light of the Supreme Court judgment in Cantonment Board, Mhow and another v. MP State Road Transport Corporation, JT 1997(4) SC 561, the matter was covered by the doctrine of desuetude and as such some notice ought to have been given to the petitioners before the respondents could insist on the certificate of practical experience.
4.
Mr. Gur Rattan Pal Singh, the learned counsel appearing for the respondent-Board has, however, supported the stand taken in the written statement and has argued with emphasis that this.
Court should not permit a deviation from the statutory regulations.
5.
The learned counsel for the parties have been heard at length.
The first argument raised by Mr. Rajiv Atma Ram needs to be examined.
It is provided in the Note below regulation 6(b) that the certificate showing the requisite percentage of attendance in practical work for an examination should be appended with the application form, but as the requisite attendance was 75% of the total lectures rendered, it was not capable of compliance.
This argument of the learned counsel is mis-conceived for the reason that the attendance up to the date of filing of the application forms has to be taken as the Note does not talk about the percentage of attendance but the "required" attendance.
6.
It has also been argued by Mr. Rajiv Atma Ram that the Note below clause 6 has to be read as being appended to clause 6(a) and not to clause 6(b) and in that eventuality the candidates who were appearing as private candidates would be deemed to be those from an affiliated School.
Rule 6 is reproduced below :  "6.
Notwithstanding above, the following shall be eligible to appear as a private candidate at the annual examination: (a) (i) Late School/College Student, who has completed the required percentage of attendances for an examination and is recommended by the head of the Institution concerned for admission to such examination.
(b) Further, the following categories of candidates shall also be eligible to appear in humanities group only as a private candidate at the annual examination : (i) A candidate who has passed XI Class examination or its equivalent examination at least one academic year previously.
(ii) For the examination to be conducted in 1993 and thereafter a candidate who has passed matriculation or its equivalent examination at least two academic years previously, Note :- In the case of subjects having practicals the candidates shall submit a certificate from the Principal to the effect that he has completed the required percentage of attendances in Practical Work in an affiliated institution."
It will be seen that Rule 6(a) relates to admission to be given to late school/college students who have completed the required percentage of attendance for an examination and are recommended by the head of the Institution concerned for admission to such examination.
Further, Rule 6(b) provides that private candidates may also take the examination if otherwise fulfilling the qualification.
The basic qualifications have however been prescribed for both the categories of students mentioned in Rule 6.
This would be evident from the fact that even for late School/College students there may be some candidates doing the humanities course.
To argue, therefore, that different sets of examination rules would apply to the two categories of students covered by Rule 6(a) and 6(b), although the were taking the same examination, would be wholly unacceptable.
Moreover, if Mr. Atma Ram's argument was to be accepted, the Note would have to be read between Rule 6(a) and 6(b), but the fact that it is placed on the bottom makes it clear that it applies equally to both categories of students.
7.
Mr. Atma Ram's final argument however has merit.
It is the admitted case that the Note in question had been introduced for the first time in 1993.
It is the conceded position that till the examination to be held in March 1999 (for the forms were to be filled by September 1998), the Board had not insisted on the compliance with its provisions.
In this view of the matter, the judgment cited by Mr. Atma Ram does, to some extent, become relevant.
It has been held in MP State Road Transport Corporation's case (supra) that in order to apply the principle of desuetude it was required that a particular statute had not been in operation for a fairly long time and though the concept of a fairly long time had not been defined, it must depend on the facts of each case.
As already mentioned above, the Note in question had been introduced in the examination rules for the first time in 1993 but right upto 1998, its enforcement had not been insisted upon.
It would, therefore, be open to petitioner Nos. 1 to 10 to say that they has sought admission as private candidates on that basis.
8.
In the reply filed by the respondents, it has been admitted that the rule in question came into operation in 1993 and since than the Board had been trying to get it implemented.
Despite being questioned in this behalf, Mr. Gur Rattan Pal Singh has not been able to explain the steps taken by the Board in this direction.
It must, therefore, be held that as the Note in question has been in disuse for almost six years, the petitioners were entitled to notice of the fact that it was to be enforced from the ensuing year.
The judgment in AP Christians Medical Education Society's case (supra) cited by Mr. Gur Rattan Pal Singh is to no avail.
In this case the question posed arose out of a "brazen and bizarre exploitation of the naive and foolish, eager and ready- to-be-duped, aspirants for admission to professional collegiate courses, behind the smoke-screen of the right of the minorities to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice - is what this case is about."
It was in this background that Mr. Venugopal (appearing for the students who had suffered on account of their folly and the conduct of the College) had argued that it would be proper to issue appropriate directions to the University to protect the interest of the students who had taken admission in an un-recognised college.
The Court while declining this request had observed thus :  "We cannot by our fiat direct the University to disobey the statute to which it owes its existence and the regulations made by the University itself.
We cannot imagine anything more destructive of the rule of law than a direction by the Court to disobey the laws.
We regret that the students who have been admitted into the college have not only lost the money which they must have spent to gain admission into the college, but have also lost one or two years of precious time virtually jeopardising their future careers.
But that is a situation which they have brought upon themselves as they sought and obtained admission in the college despite the warnings issued by the University from time to time.
We are happy to note that the University acted watchfully and wakefully, issuing timely warnings to those seeking admission to the institution.
We are sure many must have been taken heed of the warnings issued by the University and refrained from seeking admission to the Institution.
If some did not heed the warnings issued by the University, they are themselves to blame."
In the cited case the students had taken admission despite having been warned that the college in question was not a recognised one and in that eventuality the Court has thought it improper to come to their rescue.
The case before me is on a different set of facts.
Itis evident that though the Note did exist since 1993, it had not been enforced and no warning had been given by the Board to the petitioners and to the others who had taken admission as private candidates for the examination to commence in 1999, that it would be rigidly enforced with effect from the examination of that year.
The enormity of the problem can more accurately be gauged from the facts detailed in paragraph 3 of the writ petition (and not denied by the respondent-Board) which indicate that in March 1998 (i.e. in the previous year) a total number of 1,60,000 students had taken the 10+2 Examination conducted by the respondent-Board and out of this number as many as 60,000 had appeared as private candidates out of which 55,000 had taken subjects which had a practical examination as well.
The huge number of students thus affected is a factor which would in any event tilt the scale in the petitioners' favour for the current year.
9.
Having held as above, this petition is accordingly allowed and a direction is issued to the respondent-Board that as far as the examination which have already been held in March 1999 are concerned, the Board shall not insist on the requirement of a certificate of practical experience as provided by the Note but in the years to follow, the provisions of the Note would be fully applicable and to ensure adequate knowledge to all concerned, it is directed that the Board will give due publicity to that effect for the examinations commencing from the year 2000 onwards.
It is also directed that the candidates who have taken the examination in the year 1999 after changing their subjects, will not be entitled to claim that they should be permitted to take the examination once again with subject having practicals.
No costs.
Petition allowed.