RL Anand, J - Shri Som Bir, Constable No. 5/738, 5th Battalion, of Haryana Armed Police, Madhuban has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226-227 of the Constitution of India praying for the issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari for the quashment of the order Annexure P1 dated 2741992 and it has been inter-alia pleaded by the petitioner that he was enrolled in the Haryana Police after competitive selection by the Department Selection Commeettee consisting of one Inspector General of Police, two Deputal Inspectors General and four Superintendents of Police and was sent to the recruit basic course to Police Training College.
He was doing the training with hard work and with keen interest, but on one morning he was repatriated from PTC, Madhuban to his parent unit i.e. 5th Bn.
HAP vide office memo No. 11235 dated 2141992.
The said order was passed by the Director, Police Training College, Madhuban for becoming 7 hours late while coming back to the College after leave on 141992.
After receipt of this communication, respondent No. 4 discharged the petitioner purported to be under Punjab Police Rule 1221 vide his office Endst.
No. 5498-5506/12 dated 2741992 stating therein that the petitioner was found unlikely to prove an efficient police officer.
There is no appeal against the order passed by the Commandant under Rule 1221 as applicable to the State of Haryana.
Even then the petitioner filed the appeal under the belief that the appeal lies against the order of discharge passed by respondent No. 4 in which he gave each and every detail of the so-called absence.
According to the petitioner, on 16111991 he became absent because his mother became seriously ill and she was on the death bed as informed to the petitioner by his younger brother.
He was not granted any leave by any senior officer.
On 18121991 he appeared before the senior officers for the sanction of 2 days casual leave due to the illness of his mother.
He was informed orally by the senior officers to go to see his mother and leave would be sanctioned in due course.
In the month of January, 1992, the petitioner was granted three days casual leave but he fell ill in his village and then he went to the civil hospital where the Medical Officer advised him four days rest and thus he over-stayed those four days leave and produced medical certificate out-door ticket No. 295 dated 11.1.1992.
On 6.1.1992 the petitioner again fell ill and went to HAP.
Hospital for treatment.
Some medicines were prescribed by the doctor.
He went to the shop of the chemist where some of the medicines were not available in the stock as a result of which he went to the local market Karnal in order to purchase the medicines, but he subsequently came to know on his return that he has been marked absent.
Again on 141992, the brother of the petitioner came to the College and the petitioner accompanied his brother upto the bus stand and became late.
He was informed by the Law Instructor that he has been marked absent.
He went to the office of the M.H.C., but he did not deliberately mark the arrival of the petitioner in the D.D.R.
He approached the Drill Instructor, who made the entry of the arrival of the petitioner in the D.D.R.
The petitioner has stated that the order Annexure P1 dated 2741992 is illegal, void and against the principles of natural justice as it amounts to dismissal and is not in accordance with the provisions of Rule 1221 of the Punjab Police Rules (hereinafter referred to as 'the Rules').
According to the petitioner, the impugned order is stigmatic in nature and secondly the Punishing Authority did not apply its independent mind in passing the impugned order.
Rather the order has been passed on the direction of Director, PTC., Madhuban as is evident from the order itself and in these circumstances the order cannot operate against the petitioner.
2.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents, who filed the written statement and according to them there is no legal and constitutional right to the petitioner which has been infringed by them.
He was recruited as temporary Constable in the Haryana Police and was liable to be discharged from the service within three years of service as he was found unlikely to become an efficient police officer.
His work was assessed very closely by the senior officers and the same was not found satisfactory.
The petitioner did not take any interest in the training.
He was a habitual absentee and was an unwilling worker.
He was warned on different occasions during his service period.
He remained absent from his responsible duties from 16111991 to 18111991, i.e. for 2 days when he became absent from daily roll call without permission.
Leave was sanctioned to him without pay.
Further, from 18121991 to 20.12.1991 petitioner again became absent for the said reason and he was awarded punishment of 7 days drill.
On 6.1.1992 he became absent for one day he was awarded punishment of 3 days extra parade.
Then he remained absent from 11.1.1992 to 1511992 for 5 days, from 1421992 to 15.2.1992 for 2 days, 631992 to 10.3.1992 for 4 days, 141992 for one day and from 2141992 to 2741992 for 7 days and he was awarded extra parade for 3 days; 4 days; 7 days; 15 days and 7 days respectively.
These minor punishments were the opportunities for the petitioner to amend himself but he did not do so.
Still a lenient view was taken and leaves were granted to the petitioner.
He was sanctioned 17 days leave on different occasions during this small span of his service and finally he was discharged from service when it was found that he was not likely to become an efficient police officer in accordance with Rule 1221.
He was sent to Recruit Basic Training College in Batch No. 46 for training and he was repatriated to his parent Battalion as he was not taking interest in his training with the following observations :-  "This recruit Constable Sombir Singh either goes on leave or if he doesn't get leave, he tried to take medical rest on the pretext of illness.
If he doesn't get medical rests, then he absents without permission and doesn't care for training in spite of warnings."
Further, it is stated by the respondents that over-all performance of the petitioner was taken into consideration.
He was warned several times but he did not care and made no efforts to improve himself.
The petitioner remained absent wilfully without any cause from 18121991 to 11.1.1992 and he was punished with extra parades.
The petitioner has concocted a false story in order to save himself from the absence from duty.
With above broad defence, respondents have prayed for the dismissal of the writ petition.
3.
I have heard Mr. IS Balhara, Advocate on behalf of the petitioner, Mr. Ashok Singh Chaudhary, AAG, Haryana and with their assistance I have gone through the record of this case.
4.
Rule 1221 as applicable to the Haryana State provides as follows :-  "A constable who is found unlikely to prove an efficient police officer may be discharged by the Superintendent at any time within three years of enrolment.
There shall be no appeal against an order of discharge under this rule."
5.
We all know that police force is a disciplined force.
A difficult training is always provided to a person who joins the police force.
This police training is necessary to keep the efficiency of the person so recruited.
Object is further to ensure the physical fitness of a recruit.
While dealing a case of disciplined force, the administration cannot afford any laxity either in his work or conduct.
This is the reason that the legislature had given an option to the employer to discharge a constable if he is found unlikely to prove an efficient police officer within three years of his enrolment.
Efficiency is the basic criteria for the purpose of Rule 1221.
6.
The impugned order would show that it has been taken note of by the competent authority that the petitioner was deputed for his basic training in Batch No. 46 in Police Training College, Madhuban and from there he became absent on as many as 7 occasions starting from 16111991 to 141992.
On some occasions he remained absent between 2 to 4 days and thereafter there was a continuous absence on the part of the petitioner w.e.f.
2141992.
In these circumstances the Director, Police Training College, Madhuban intimated to the Commandant, 5th Battalion, Madhuban vide office letter dated 2141992 that the petitioner became absent from his basic training on 7 times and he was a habitual absentee and did not take interest in his basic training.
Also it was informed to the punishing authority that the petitioner was not capable of pulling on in the police department when he was adopting such a casual attitude during the basic training itself.
When this data was supplied, the punishing authority came to the opinion by way of subjective satisfaction that the petitioner was not likely to become an efficient police officer, as a result of which he was discharged from the service by taking the aid of Rule 1221 with immediate effect.
7.
The point which now survives for determination is whether the order Annexure P1 is a stigmatic; whether it inducts the petitioner with mis-conduct and whether this order has been passed without application of mind on the direction of the Director, Police Training College, Madhuban or that the Director had simply given a factual data to the punishing authority regarding the activities of the petitioner.
It is the case of the petitioner himself that he was deputed for his basic training in Police Training College, Madhuban.
He became absent on seven occasions.
In these circumstances, it was obligatory on the part of the Director to inform the punishing authority about the activities and conduct of the petitioner.
When a police officer is discharged under Rule 1221, always some basis are laid down, otherwise how an order can be passed by the punishing authority.
As I have stated above that efficiency is a fore-front criteria on the part of a recruit.
If the punishing authority in its subjective satisfaction is not convinced with the work and conduct of the recruit, it can certainly resort to the provisions of Rule 1221 within three years of the service.
The reading of the impugned order Annexure P1 shows that the order is not stigmatic.
The period of absence of the petitioner has been recorded as a matter of fact and on the basis of that data the authorities had formulated an opinion that the petitioner was a habitual absentee and did not take interest in his basic training and as such he was not capable of becoming an efficient police officer with such a casual attitude during the basic training itself.
8.
Faced with this difficulty the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner relied upon various judgments both of the Hon'ble Supreme Court as well as this Court and it is my duty now to discuss those judgments.
The first citation relied upon by the learned counsel for the petitioner is Hardeep Singh v. State of Haryana and others, 1987(4) SLR 576.
That was a judgment where the Hon'ble Supreme Court was interpreting Rule 1624 of the Rules and was dealing the case of a probationer where in the termination order the claim was distinguishable on the face of it.
There was allegation against the probationer that he was taking part in a "non-taking food campaign".
The Hon'ble Supreme Court lifted the veil behind the order and was pleased to remark that though the order appears to be simple in nature but in fact is by way of punishment and thus violation of Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India and Rule 1624 of the Rules was made.
Here the facts are totally different.
In the order Annexure P1 there is honest repetition of a fact which was informed to the punishing authority.
9.
The counsel for the petitioner then relied upon a Division Bench judgment of this court Brahma Nand v. The State of Haryana, 1995(1) SLR 509 : 1995(1) SCT 360 (P&H)(DB).
Reliance was also placed upon an order dated 1941990 passed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Civil Appeal Nos. 93, 94 and 95 of 1989 Sukhbir Singh etc. v. State of Haryana and upon Om Parkash v. State of Haryana, 1991(4) SLR 75.
Yet reliance was placed upon a judgment dated 5.8.1998 passed by the Hon'ble Single Bench of this Court in C.W.P.
No. 127 of 1992 Const.
Narender Singh v. State of Haryana.
This court has also come across the judgment reported as Amrit Kumar (Ex-Constable) v. State of Haryana, 1997(1) SLR 44 : 1996(4) SCT 172 (P&H)(DB), where the Hon'ble Division Bench was pleased to hold that if the impugned order indicates that the order was stigmatic and that there exists a specific rule authorising the competent authority to discharge a police officer during first three years of his service, the exercise of this power on the basis of evaluation of the performance of the employee cannot be held as illegal unless it is shown to be mala fide or patently arbitrary.
I have considered the judgments of all the cases which have been relied upon by the learned counsel for the petitioner and also the judgment of the Hon'ble Division Bench in Amrit Kumar's case (supra).
In the order dated 5th August, 1998 there was some alleged misconduct on the part of the delinquent official and that mis-conduct was taken note of when the powers under Rule 1221 were invoked.
In that case it prevailed upon the punishing authority that the recruit was in the habit of committing theft and in these circumstances it was held by the Hon'ble Lordship that the order of discharge was not simpliciter and it attaches a stigma and when an order attaches a stigma even in that eventuality a probationer cannot be discharged from service without there being a regular enquiry against him for alleged misconduct.
In the present case the order is not stigmatic.
There is no indication that the punishing authority while passing the impugned order had indicted the petitioner.
In Om Parkash's case (supra) his Lordship was dealing a case of probationer and the defence of the government was that the petitioner had abandoned the job and had absented himself without any leave and as such he had no right to the post being a probationer.
The Hon'ble Lordship was pleased to rely upon Smt. Rajinder Kaur v. Punjab State, 1986(3) SLR 78 and Hardeep Singh's case (supra).
In Smt. Rajinder Kaur's case she was relieved from the service because there was an enquiry against her for the alleged misconduct of staying nights with male constables.
The Hon'ble Lordship lifted the veil and came to the conclusion that the order was in the nature of punishment.
In Om Parkash's case (supra) also the Hon'ble Lordship was pleased to hold that the whole basis is the misconduct of the petitioner of having absented unauthorisedly during the training course and admittedly no enquiry was held prior to passing the order of discharge.
In the instant case, the impugned order Annexure P1 only talks of simple discharge when the punishing authority was satisfied that the petitioner was not capable of pulling on in the department with such a casual attitude during the basic training itself.
In the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court dated 1941990 the Hon'ble Lordships took into consideration that the real reason for discharge of the employee was the incident of 3rd August, 1985 and that the action of the department was on account of misconduct and it had nothing to do with the efficiency of the recruit.
Moreover, no data was given in the cited case before the Hon'ble Judges to conclude that the employee could not prove himself to be an efficient police officer.
10.
So, in these circumstances, the entire stress is whether the impugned action on the part of the respondent-authorities is arbitrary, mala fide or perverse.
In para No. 14 of the judgment in Amrit Kumar's case (supra) the Hon'ble Division Bench clearly held as follows :-  "Challenge to the order Annexure P5 deserves to be disposed of shortly.
The exercise of power under Rule 1221 of the PPR is different than the one which vests in the competent authority under Rule 16 of the PPR and, therefore, the Deputy Inspector General of Police has rightly taken the view that the appeal filed by the petitioner is not maintainable."
The power under Rule 1221 is a power of discharge.
If the punishing authority is not satisfied with the performance of a recruit such recruit can be discharged from the service by passing a simpliciter order of discharge within three years of service.
The opinion to be formulated is by the competent authority that such a recruit cannot become an efficient officer.
Of course, the order could be successfully challenged had the learned counsel for the petitioner was in a position to show either on the face of it or by attending circumstances that it is stigmatic, mala fide, arbitrary or it has been passed for extranuous reasons or with a specific background which causes a stigma on the career of the recruit.
No such fact has been proved by the learned counsel for the petitioner in this case and in these circumstances I do not see any merit in this writ petition, which is hereby dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.