Harjit Singh Bedi, J - The petitioner applied for admission to the entrance test for the B.Sc.
Nursing (4 years) Course to be held by the PGI Chandigarh for the Session 1991-95 (in which 50 seats were available) and on the declaration of the result was placed at Serial No. 11 in the waiting list.
All 50 seats available for the course were filled up before 31st July, 1991 which was the last date for admission with late fee from the main as well as the waiting list, whereas four seats became available after that date as some of the students, who had gained admission, had meanwhile left the course.
As the candidates up to waiting list No. 9 had already got admission before 31st July, 1991, the petitioner had been promoted to position No. 2 in the waiting list as on that date, she filed a representation Annexure P-3 dated 9th Sept, 1991, before the Principal, College of Nursing of the PGI, Chandigarh claiming admission in the circumstances.
The respondent-Institute, however, refused to take note of the representation, on which she has filed the present writ petition.
2.
Notice of motion was issued in this case for 23rd September, 1991, when the case was adjourned to 7th October, 1991, on which date a direction was issued that the Panjab University, through its Registrar, be impleaded as respondent No. 4 and that the writ petition be treated as a representation and the issue be left to the decision of the University in the light of the decision of this Court in Ms. Sumedha Kalia v. State of Haryana, AIR 1990 P&H 239.
This Court also allowed provisional admission to the petitioner under this order.
The case was thereafter taken up on a number of occasions, but the decision envisaged under the order dated 7th Oct, 1991, was not forthcoming.
The petition was accordingly admitted on 11th February, 1992 after the decision had been taken by the University declining the petitioner's claim.
The case came up for regular hearing before Hon'ble G.S.
Singhvi, J on 20th October, 1995 and his Lordship noted that as almost four years had elapsed since the petitioner's admission, the respondent-University should produce the petitioner's result in a sealed cover.
The result was accordingly produced before this Court on November 30, 1995 and after its perusal returned to the University.
The petitioner also sought the declaration of her result in the year 1994 so that she could do her internship in the PGI for the fourth and final year.
This prayer was declined by this Court on the premise that the result for the 3rd year had not so far been declared.
3.
On notice of motion, various replies have been filed by the respondents.
In the reply filed by respondent No. 4, the University, it has been pointed out that the normal dates for admissions were between 171991 and 2071991, and late admissions with the sanction of the Vice Chancellor were to be made between 2171991 and 3171991 though in special circumstances the Vice Chancellor could permit admission up to 31st August, 1991, except in the case of admissions to the MBBS Course.
As already noted above, this Court had time and again issued directions to the University to take a decision on the petitioner's representation seeking late admission.
The record has been produced before me in Court by the learned counsel for the respondent- University and it transpires therefrom that the decision had been taken on 19th December, 1991, declining the petitioner's request on the ground that as on 31st July, 1991, all fifty seats in the course had been filled in.
It is also clear that the Registrar had not taken into account that the Vice Chancellor could, under special circumstances, allow admission upto 31st August, 1991.
It is the cases of the respondent themselves that four seats had become available between 31st July, 1991 and 31st August, 1991, against which, to my mind, the petitioner could have been admitted.
The petitioner had been granted provisional admission way back in the year 1991 under the orders of this Court and eight long years have since elapsed since that date.
The petitioner has in the meantime completed three years of instruction and could not complete the fourth and final year as her prayer for joining internship was declined by this Court on account of the fact that her result for the 3rd year had not been declared due to the pendency of the writ petition.
For this additional reason also it would be most inequitable to decline the petitioner's prayer in the writ petition at this stage.
4.
It has also been contended by the learned counsel for the respondent PGI that the petitioner had got married during the pendency of the course and, as such, she was not entitled to admission on that score as well.
This argument is also not well founded.
The course in question had started in July, 1991 and was to be completed in May/June, 1995.
As per the additional affidavit filed by the petitioner, she had got married on July 13, 1995 ie, after the course would have been completed.
The respondents cannot have it both ways; firstly to oppose the petitioner's prayer for permission to join as an intern, which would have entitled her to complete the course before her marriage and conversely to attempt to non-suit her on the ground that she had got married before completing the course.
The petitioner's inability to complete her internship cannot, therefore, be attributed to some flaw on her part.
5.
This petition is accordingly allowed and a direction is issued to the respondents to declare the petitioner's result forthwith and to give her all consequential benefits that may arise therefrom if she is successful.
The PGI shall also permit her to join her internship in the ensuing course.
No costs.
Dasti order.
Petition allowed.