Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was working as a Steno-typist in the court of Addl.
Senior Sub Judge, Gohana.
On November 13, 1991 a counsel made request to the Court for permission to place the Fee Certificate on the file.
The request was declined by the Judge on the ground that the judgment had already been pronounced and thereafter the document could not be taken on record.
The petitioner in spite of knowing this position placed the document on record.
He was called upon to explain as to why disciplinary proceedings be not initiated against him.
Ultimately, the proceedings were initiated.
The petitioner misbehaved with the Additional District and Sessions Judge who had been asked to inquire into the matter.
He even used abusive language.
Finally, the District and Sessions Judge, Sonepat found that in the circumstances it was not possible or reasonably practicable to hold an inquiry.
Thus inquiry was dispensed with.
After considering the matter at length he awarded the penalty of dismissal from service to the petitioner.
A copy of 12 page order passed by the learned District and Sessions Judge has been produced on record as Annexure P-3.
The petitioner filed an appeal.
It was considered by the Hon'ble Inspecting Judge of the District.
After considering the matter Mr. Justice AP Chowdhary (as his Lordship then was) dismissed the appeal.
The order regarding the summary rejection of the appeal was communicated to the petitioner.
Aggrieved by the order of his dismissal, the petitioner has filed the present writ petition.
2.
Notice of motion was directed to be issued.
Detailed written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
The petitioner has filed a replication also.
In the written statement it has been pointed out that many cases "regarding loss of the record/documents relating to the period when he was serving as Steno-typist, in the Court of Addl.
Senior Sub Judge-cum-Sub Divisional Judicial Magistrate, Gohana, were reported by the Presiding Officer of the Court; and the petitioner was held responsible but because of his dismissal, the papers were filed."
The averments on the merits of the case have been controverted.
It has also been pointed out that the petitioner was dismissed from service on June 4, 1993.
His appeal had been rejected on August 31, 1993.
He had filed this petition in February, 1995.
3.
It appears that the petitioner had himself filed this petition.
Subsequently the Legal Aid had entrusted this case to Mr. PC Chaudhary, Advocate.
4.
We have heard Mr. Chaudhary, Advocate.
5.
Learned Counsel has contended that no ground for dispensing with the inquiry was made out.
Consequently, the impugned order of dismissal, which was passed without holding a proper inquiry is vitiated.
6.
Is it so ?
A perusal of the order passed by the learned District and Sessions Judge shows that after perusal of the record he had come to the conclusion that "during the course of inquiry Shri Prem Kumar (the present petitioner) had misbehaved with Shri GS Kotla, Addl.
Senior Sub Judge (witness); that Prem Kumar had humiliated, insulted and abused in filthy, obscene language (Shri BS Sharma, Inquiry Officer) during the course of inquiry; that a very material witness Shri Mohan Singh Malik had avoided appearance in the court as a witness as account of the intimidation or fear of Shri Prem Kumar, Steno- typist....." Still further the learned District and Sessions Judge has recorded that "during the course of another disciplinary proceedings against him, Shri Prem Kumar had threatened the Punishing Authority (District and Sessions Judge) that he would commit self immolation in his court room etc. etc. On this basis it has been observed "I am fully satisfied that for the reasons already recorded above, it is not reasonably practicable to hold the inquiry and/or to proceed any further with the inquiry, already initiated against Shri Prem Kumar".
On a perusal of the detailed order recorded by the learned District and Sessions Judge, we are satisfied that the inquiry had been dispensed with for good reasons.
It cannot be said that the order was not justified.
7.
Faced with this situation, the learned Counsel for the petitioner has contended that the extreme penalty of dismissal should not have been awarded to the petitioner.
We are unable to accept this contention.
The petitioner was wroking as a Steno-typist in the Court.
He did not honour and maintain the sanctity of the judicial record which came to his possession in the performance of his duties.
He added a document thereto which was not permissible.
It would not be safe to allow such a person to be a part of the functionaries in the Court.
Still further when proceedings were initiated, the petitioner misbehaved with the officer who had come to depose with regard to the factual position as also with the learned Additional District and Sessions Judge, who was enquiring into the matter.
Not only that the petitioner did not show the due respect, he in fact, misbehaved.
He used filthy language.
According to the impugned order, the petitioner "humiliated, insulted and called bad names."
Still further, this is not the solitary instance.
On an earlier occasion he had threatened another officer viz. the then District and Sessions Judge, Sonepat that he would commit self- immolation.
Such a person deserves no sympathy.
8.
No other point has been raised before us.
9.
In view of above, we find no ground to interfere.
The writ petition is accordingly dismissed.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.