Sidheshwar Narayan, J - The appellant was awarded punishment of removal from service by order dated 29th July, 1993 passed by the Commandant, CISF at Dhanbad.
Aggrieved, the appellant filed a statutory appeal before the DIG, CISF at Dhanbad which was dismissed.
Aggrieved again, the appellant preferred Revision Petition against the said rejection before the Inspector General, CISF, Calcutta who vide his order dated 7th January, 1995 dismissed the Revision Application.
The appellant approached the learned Single Judge by filing writ application under Article 226 of the Constitution of India for seeking appropriate reliefs.
2.
The learned Single Judge vide the impugned judgment dated 4th March, 1998 has dismissed the writ application only on the ground that this Court did not have the territorial jurisdiction to entertain the writ application since, according to the learned Single Judge, no cause of action or any part of it has accrued within the territory of this Court.
3.
After hearing the learned Advocates for the parties and considering their rival contentions, we find ourselves in disagreement with the view taken by the learned Single Judge.
It appears that even though the order of removal from service and the order by the appellate authority rejecting the appeal were both passed outside the territorial jurisdiction of this Court and to that extent the appellant surely cannot be said to have accrued the cause of action or any part of it within the territorial jurisdiction of this Court.
The order dismissing the Revision filed by the appellant was undoubtedly passed by the Inspector General, CISF, respondent No. 1 at Calcutta.
It is clearly seen that the office of the respondent No. 1 is at Calcutta and this respondent is vested with the power to entertain a revision application against an appealable order passed by the appellate authority since the filing of the revision application is a right conferred upon the appellant.
Filing of a revision against either the appealable order or the original order of removal from service is a continuing process and has a link in the entire chain of events thus accruing to the appellant a part of cause of action in so far as the territorial jurisdiction of this Court is concerned.
Under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, this Court has the territorial jurisdiction to entertain a writ application if any part of cause of action accrues to the writ petitioner within the territorial jurisdiction of this Court.
The concept of the cause of action or a part of it has a direct bearing to Section 20 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
It is now a well established principle of law that the cause of action actually is a complete bundle of facts, and if any single fact out of such totality of facts has a vital link in the chain of events, such vital link by itself would amount to the accrual of a part of cause of action and the Court within whose territory such of cause of action accrues would also have the jurisdiction to entertain the application for grant of appropriate relief.
4.
As noticed above, the filing of a revision application by an aggrieved person against an order either originally passed removing him from service or, dismissing his appeal from such removal order is a right conferred upon law.
Every order as originally passed or as decided in appeal proceedings ultimately merges with the order finally passed by the highest authority.
In the present case we have seen that the Order of the Commandant removing the appellant from service and the order passed by the DIG in appeal got merged with the order passed by the Inspector General in the exercise of his revisional powers.
Not only this, the appellant had specifically challenged in the writ application the order dated 7.1.95 passed by the IG, C.I.S.F.
and had sought its recision/revocation and cancellation by issuance of a writ of mandamus.
Undoubtedly the order passed in revision application had ultimately decided the fate of the appellant and had accorded a final seal as far as the appellant's service was concerned.
There is therefore no doubt that the passing of the order by the revisional authority gave rise to a very important cause of action to the appellant, it being a very vital link in the entire chain of events starting from the initiation of disciplinary proceedings, taking these proceedings to the passing of the order of removal from service, proceeding further to the stage of dismissal of the appeal and ultimately culminating in the rejection of the revision application.
All these events had an inseparable link with each other and each of them therefore by itself could be said to give rise to the accrual of a part of cause of action.
To us it appears that the learned Single Judge perhaps ignored this important aspect from his consideration.
5.
In the light of what we have said above we are of the view that the writ application filed by the appellant was maintainable since this Court admittedly has the jurisdiction to entertain the writ application.
On that count therefore we have no hesitation in holding that the learned Single Judge erred in law in dismissing the writ application.
Such order of dismissal of the writ application therefore deserves to be set aside.
6.
For the foregoing reasons therefore we allow the appeal, set aside the order of the learned Single Judge and revive the writ application with all consequences.
7.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.