HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, a resident of the State of Punjab as per the residents certificate, Annexure P-3 passed her Senior Secondary Examination in September, 1996.
Respondent No. 2, The Director, State Council of Education Research and Training, Punjab issued a prospectus for the competitive entrance examination for admission to the Elementary Teachers Training Course in the various District Institutes of Education and Training in the State of Punjab for the year 1997-99.
The petitioner took the entrance test on November 22, 1997, as a general category candidates (female) and on the publication of the result of April 2, 1998, she was shown as having qualified.
It is the petitioner's case that the admission to the Elementary Teachers Training Course was to be made in terms of the prospectus that had been originally issued but on March 17, 1998, respondent No. 1, i.e. State of Punjab issued a notificated changing the criteria for admission against the reserved categories.
It is further the petitioner's case that as a result of change in criteria, she had been deprived of a seat in the general category.
It appears that the admissions to the course in question was held in four phases i.e. from April 13 to May 9, 1998 and though the petitioner was put on the waiting list, and though called for counselling, she was unable to get admission as candidates higher in merit were available.
The petitioner accordingly made an oral representation to the official respondents and pointed out that the ratio between the girls and boys had been disturbed on account of the change in the criteria notified on March 17, 1998 and that the reservation of 2% seats for wards of teachers was not justified in the light of the Supreme Court's decision in Thapar Institute of Engineering and Technology v. State of Punjab and another, 1997(1) SCT 824 (SC) : A.I.R. 1997 Supreme Court 793.
As the petitioner's grievance was not redressed, she has come to this Court by way of the present writ petition.
2.
On notice of motion, a written statement has been filed on behalf of respondents and the stand taken is that the ratio between girls and boys had not been disturbed and in any case the petitioner being a general category candidate could not have suffered any prejudice on account of the change in criteria notified on March 17, 1998 as it pertained to the filling up of seats in the reserved categories.
It has also been pointed out in the written statement that the reserved category of wards of teachers was justified in law on account of the fact that teachers had "to serve under different and difficult circumstances (sic) have some seats to their credit.
Reserved seats of teachers have thus a reasonable nexus with the objectives to be achieved."
(para 3 of the written statement) The respondents have also appended Annexure R-2, dated August 2, 1990, whereby the wards of teachers (serving or retired) have been given reservation of 2% of the total seats.
3.
Mr. Puneet Bali, the learned counsel for the petitioner, has raised two points before me during the course of arguments; firstly that the ratio of 50% girls and 50% boys has been disturbed on account of change of criteria notified on March 17, 1998 and that this departure was not permissible in the light of Full Bench decision of this Court in Swaranjit Singh v. State of Punjab and others, 1998(2) SLR 14 : 1997(4) SCT 511 (P&H) (FB); and secondly that the reservation category for wards of teachers (serving or retired) that had been created by Annexure R-2 was not justified in the light of judgment of the Supreme Court in Thapar Institute's case (supra).
4.
Mr. Anil Sharma, Deputy Advocate General, Punjab has, however, tried to justify the respondents' case by relying upon the written statement.
In addition, he has placed on record a chart pertaining to District Nawansahar in which it has been spelt out that as a matter of fact 30 seats each to male and female candidates had been given to District Nawansahar instead of 50 in all as advertised and as such the petitioner's apprehension that she had been left out due to a reduction in the number of seats in the general category was without basis.
Dealing with Mr. Bali's second argument, Mr. Sharma has urged that Thapar Institute's case (supra) pertained to a reservation made for the wards of teachers of that very institution whereas the general reservation of 2% seats made for the wards of teachers whether serving or retired or whether working in private or Government Schools as per Annexure R-2 was clearly distinguishable on the facts of the present case.
5.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, I am of the opinion that Mr. Bali's argument on the second point raised by him does have merit.
6.
It is true that in Thapar Institute's case (supra), the point at issue was whether reservation could be made for the wards of teachers of that Institute but the observations made by the Supreme Court leave no manner of doubt that the general reservation of the kind created by Annexure R-2, would be equally unjustifiable.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India considered its earlier judgment in the State of Gujarat v. Meghji Pethraj Shah Charitable Trust, 1994(3) SCC 552 : 1994 AIR SCW 2584 : 1994(3) SCT 162 (SC); on the following observations :-  "Now, where an individual or an organisation which established and runs a medical college (recognised by State or affiliated to a university) is not entitled, according to Unnikrishan (1993 AIR SCW 863) to admit students on its own, or in its discretion, it is inconceivable that a person or a body which was assisted in setting up of a Government medical college would be permitted to have a quota of its own to which it can nominate students of its own choice.
There is no room for such an arrangement in law."
The Supreme Court also relied upon the Chairman/Director, Combined Entrance Examination (CEE), 1990 v. Osiris Das, 1992(3) SCC 543 on the following observations :-  "There is no dispute that the GB Pant University is aided and financed by the State Government and the University is an instrumentality of the State.
Any instrumentality of the State cannot give preferential treatment to a class of persons without there being any justification for the same.
The reservation of seats for admission to the B Tech.
course in favour of the sons and wards of the employees of the University is violative of the doctrine of equality enshrined under Article 14 of the Constitution.
There is no rationale for the reservation of the seats in favour of the sons and wards of the employees of the University nor any such reservation has any rational nexus with the object which is sought to be achieved by the University.
The State Government, in our opinion, rightly insisted on the University to do away with the reservations in favour of the sons and wards of the employees."
A cumulative reading of these two passages would reveal that a reservation for wards of the employees cannot be permitted as it would be violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
As a matter of fact, no reasonable attempt has ever been made by the respondents to justify it and all that the written statement says is that teachers have to work under different and difficult circumstances.
What their "different and difficult" circumstances are has also not been spelt out.
7.
It is also evident from Annexure R-2, on which the respondents have placed reliance, that the reservation impugned herein somehow does not fit-in with the nature of the other reserved categories created in this very document.
These are reproduced below :  1.
Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes : 25% 2.
Backward Classes 5% 3.
Rural Area 2% 4.
Border/Backward Area 2% 5.
Children/Grandchildren of political sufferers 2% 6. a) Children/widow of defence personnel who are killed or disabled to the extent of 50% or more in warb) Children of serving/ex-para military personnel 1%1% 7.
Handicapped candidates 1% 8. a) Children of widow of para military personnel/police personnel killed or disabled on action to the extent of 50% or more(b) Children of serving/ex-para military/police personnel 1%1%.
9.
Children/widow of Punjab Police and PAP personnel killed or disabled to the extent of 50% in action 3% 10.
Sportmen/sportswomen 2% 11.
Wards of teachers (serving or retired) 2% 12. a) Children of innocent civilians killed/sustained 100% disability by terrorists/by security forces acting in aid of civil powers.b) Children of victims of Nov 1984 riots.c) Children of Army deserters killed/100% physically disabled; andd) Children of external/internal migrants 2%.
A look at the chart would indicate that the reservations have been provided for the deprived sections of Society, who through their birth or due to unfortunate circumstances have been forced into an unhappy situation.
Category 11, the Reservation for the wards of teachers (serving or retired), does not fit in into the scheme of things and in the absence of a valid justification, the creation of such a reservation cannot be sustained.
8.
As already mentioned, Mr. Bali's first argument was that the petitioner a general category candidate, had been left out due to a reduction in the number of seats.
As per the material put on record, 25 seats had been offered to the girl candidates and no prejudice envisaged in Swaranjit Singh's case (supra) has, therefore, been proved by the petitioner.
The writ petition is accordingly allowed and the reserved category for the wards of teachers mentioned at Sr. No. 11 of Annexure R-2 is quashed and a direction is issued that 2% seats which will become available thereby would also be filled up in the manner provided in Harpreet Kaur v. State of Punjab, 1999(2) SCT 138 (P&H) C.W.P.
No. 7345 of 1998.
Copy dasti.
Petition allowed.