TS Doabia, J - Petition admitted.
2.
With the consent of State counsel, petition is taken up for final disposal.
3.
Services of the petitioner were terminated vide order annexure `D'.
He submits that he took up the matter before Assistant Labour Commissioner Anantnag.
He wanted that matter to be referred to Industrial Tribunal.
Labour Commissioner Jammu and Kashmir Govt. has declined this prayer.
An order annexure `L' has been passed.
For facility of reference this is being reproduced as under :  "Kindly refer to your letter No. 32/Lab/ID/88 dated 931995 on the subject cited above.
In this connection it is submitted that the case of the petitioner does not come under the purview of the Industrial Disputes Act as the applicant Sh. Shadi Lal Sharma was the permanent employee of the opposite party."
The petitioner submits that an appropriate Government is not supposed to look into the question as to whether there exists an industrial dispute or not.
According to the petitioner this is a matter which is required to be gone into by the Labour Court or by the Tribunal constituted under the Industrial Disputes Act.
4.
Petitioner was employee in Power Works Department.
The Irrigation Department of the Punjab Govt. was held to be an industry in the case reported as Des Raj v. State of Punjab, A.I.R. 1988 SC 1182.
5.
Telecom Department of the Union of India was held to be covered by the term industry.
See GM Telecom v. A Srinivasa Rao, (1997) 8 SCC 767.
6.
Thus the petitioner is prima facie right in his submission that the dispute is an industrial dispute.
This observation, however, would not be binding on the authorities constituted under the Act.
This as indicated above is a prima facie conclusion arrived at in order to indicate that respondents have not properly considered the issue.
As per Section 2A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, if the services of an employee are terminated then the concerned workman can agitate the matter on his own level.
He need not get the dispute espoused through a Union.
7.
If the aforementioned factors are taken into consideration then the petitioner is right in his submission, that the order noted above has not been passed in accordance with law.
The appropriate Govt. is not supposed to go into merits of controversy.
Some judicial precedents be noticed in this regard.
8.
The legal position in this regard is as under :-  In Bombay Union of Journalists and others v. The State of Bombay and another, A.I.R. 1964 SC 1617, the Supreme Court did observe that the Government was not precluded from making a prima facie examination on the merits of the dispute while considering whether a reference was necessary or not.
The court observed as under :  "But it would not be possible to accept the plea that the appropriate Government is precluded from considering even prima facie the merits of the dispute when it decides the question as to whether its power to make a reference should be exercised under Section 10(1) read with Section 12(5) or not.
If the claim made is patently frivolous or is clearly belated the appropriate Government may refuse to make a reference.
Likewise, if the impact of the claim on the general relations between the employer and the employees in the region is likely to be adverse the appropriate Government may take that into account in deciding whether a reference should be made or not."
But above is not the entire statement of law.
In a later portion it was further observed as under :  "Similarly on disputed questions of fact the appropriate Government cannot purport to reach final conclusions for that again would be the province of the Industrial Tribunal."
Thus the appropriate Government can examine the limited issues which may fall within the parameters indicated in case of Bombay Union of Journalists (supra).
However, the proposition is well settled that the appropriate Government cannot reach final conclusion on merits.
This is because this falls within the domain of the authorities constituted under the Act.
9.
In Shambu Nath Goyal v. Bank of Baroda, A.I.R. 1978 SC 1088, the question was considered.
Reference was made to the observations made by Lord Denning in Beetham v. Trinidad Cement Ltd, (1960) 1 All E.R.
274 with a view to find out as to what is meant by the terms `difference' and `disputes' The relevant observation from the above case was quoted and it be noticed again as under :  "By definition a "trade dispute" exists whenever a `difference' exists and a difference can exist long before the parties become locked in a combat.
It is not necessary that they should have come to blows.
It is sufficient that they should be sparring for an opening."
The Supreme Court observed that if the dispute was an industrial dispute, its factual existence and expediency of making a reference in the circumstances of a particular case are matters entirely for the Government to decide upon and it will not be competent for the Court to hold the reference bad and quash the proceedings for want of jurisdiction merely because in its opinion there was no material before the Government on which it could have come to an affirmative conclusion of those matters.
10.
In Sindhu Resettlement Corporation Ltd v. Industrial Tribunal, A.I.R. 1968 SC 529, it was ultimately concluded that the question as to whether an industrial dispute exists at the date of reference is a question of fact to be determined on the material placed before the Tribunal with the cautions enunciated in CP Sarathy's case, A.I.R. 1953 SC 53.
11.
In Nirmal Singh v. State of Punjab, A.I.R. 1984 SC 1610 the appropriate Government declined to refer the dispute on the ground that the delinquent employee was not workman within the meaning of the definition as occurring in Section 2(s).
The Supreme Court of India came to the conclusion that the question as to whether the person concerned fell within the definition of the `workmen' or not, was matter which was supposed to be determined by the authority constituted under the Act and the fact that no reasons were given by the Labour Commissioner who was exercising the powers of the appropriate Government for declining the reference, the Supreme Court quashed the order of the Labour Commissioner and gave a direction that reference be made to the Labour Court or to the Industrial Tribunal as the case may be.
12.
In M.P. Irrigation Karamchari Sangh v. State of M.P., A.I.R. 1985 SC 860, the question was whether employees of Chambal Hydel Irrigation Scheme were entitled to dearness allowance equal to that of Central Government employees and that whether they were entitled to Chambal allowance.
The State Government refused to refer the matter on the ground that it would cause additional burden on the State Exchequer.
This reason was found to be a reason not within the four corners of Sections 10 and 12(5) of the Act.
It was observed that as to what are the conditions of service of an employee is a matter which is the special preserve of the authorities constituted under the Act to be decided by the Government on a prima facie examination of the demand.
It was further observed that there may be some cases where the demand is frivolous or perverse but even in these matters a note of caution was given.
It was observed that the Government should be very slow to attempt an examination of the demand with a view to decline reference and the Courts should be vigilant whenever the Government attempts to usurp the powers of the Tribunal for adjudication of valid disputes.
It was observed "to allow the Government to do so would be to render Section 10 and Section 12(5) of the Industrial Disputes Act nugatory."
13.
In Ram Avtar Sharma and others v. State of Haryana and another, A.I.R. 1985 SC 915 it was observed that where the Government acted on extraneous and irrelevant grounds, which are not germane to determination of the dispute, then the Government can be called upon to reconsider the matter.
14.
In Telco Convoy Drivers Mazdoor Sangh v. State of Bihar and others, A.I.R. 1989 SC 1565, it was held that while considering question whether reference should be made or not the appropriate Government cannot delve into merits of disputes and determine the lis itself.
Even the question whether the rejection on the part of the appropriate Government to decline to make the reference on the ground of delay is valid or not requires to be gone into.
15.
Accordingly, this petition is allowed.
Order annexure `L' is set aside.
Respondents would take appropriate steps in the light of the decision referred to above and other observations made above.
Let this be done within a period of three months.
The period of three months would begin from the date a copy of the order passed by this Court alongwith copy of writ petition and annexures thereof are made available by the petitioner to the respondent No. 4.
Disposed of accordingly.
Petition allowed.