Abdul Qadir Parray, J - The petitioners, who are Sanitary Supervisors working in Jammu Municipality in the pay scale of Rs. 800-20-1000-25-1050-EB-30-1500 with effect from Ist of April, 1987, have stated that their counterparts working as Sanitary Supervisors in Srinagar Municipality, Srinagar are getting pay under the scale of Rs. 900-1830.
The petitioners claim that their qualification as Sanitary Supervisors being the same as the Sanitary Supervisors of Srinagar Municipality and the mode of recruitment of the petitioners as Sanitary Supervisors is also the same as that of Srinagar Municipality, and thirdly the nature of work and hours of duty of the petitioners are claimed to be the same as that of Sanitary Supervisors of Srinagar Municipality.
Despite these similarities there is a difference in the pay scales of the Sanitary Supervisors of Jammu Municipality vis-a-vis their counterparts in Srinagar Municipality and consequently the other service benefits like pension, provident fund, gratuity etc. are also being affected.
It is also claimed that the discrimination in the pay scales of Sanitary Supervisors of Jammu Municipality vis-a-vis Srinagar Municipality is against law, equity, good conscience and natural justice.
The petitioners have further submitted that such a treatment given by respondents 1 and 2 to petitioners is arbitrary, mala fide and discriminatory and that the petitioners are being deprived of their fundamental right on "equal pay for equal work" as enshrined in the Constitution.
The petitioners as such have asked for a writ of mandamus directing respondents 1 and 2 to pay to the petitioners the salary under the pay scale of Rs. 900-1830 thereby bringing them at par with the Sanitary Supervisors of Srinagar Municipality who are getting the same scale, and further directions be given to respondents that the service benefits may also be given to the petitioners equal to the service benefits of Sanitary Supervisors of Srinagar Municipality, and for any other writ which the court deems proper.
2.
The respondent State having been served, they appeared and filed their detailed counter.
In the counter filed on behalf of the respondents they have stated that none of the fundamental rights, muchness the right of equality of the petitioners have been violated in any manner regarding "equal pay for equal work" as enshrined in the Constitution of India.
It has been pleaded by the respondents that there are two grades of Sanitary Supervisors in Jammu Municipality - one is Rs. 800-1500 and the other is Rs. 1150-2050.
The grade of Rs. 800-1500 is given to the newly promoted/appointed persons and there are 28 posts in this scale.
The next scale i.e. Rs. 1150-2050 is given to senior persons on merit and ability, and there are seven posts in this scale.
This means that there are 35 total number of posts of Sanitary Supervisors in Jammu Municipality.
3.
It is further submitted on behalf of respondent State that the provision of different scales in the pay is to provide avenue of promotion to the staff and to remove stagnation and this is to be treated as an incentive to these persons; meaning thereby that a person who is working in the lower grade as a Sanitary Supervisor, has the avenues of promotion/incentives for promotion to go to a higher selection grade as a sanitary supervisor as per his work and conduct etc.  4.
It is also averred that the nature and duties of the Sanitary Supervisors working in Jammu Municipality is not the same as those performing their duties in Srinagar Municipality.
It is also reiterated that the pay scale does not depend only on the nature of work or on the volume of work done.
It requires among other evaluation of duties and the responsibility of respective posts.
The functioning of two posts may be same or similar, but it may be different in the degree in the performance.
The quantity of work may be the same, but quality may be different.
It cannot be determined by relying upon the averments made in the affidavit and so it cannot be said that nature, duties and functioning of the Sanitary Supervises working in Jammu Municipality as well as Srinagar Municipality are the same.
5.
It is also averred that the service conditions of the employes of Jammu Municipality are governed by the Jammu Municipality Subordinate Service Rules of 1970 and in Srinagar Municipality, these are governed by Srinagar Municipality Subordinate Service Rules of 1970.
Though source for both the rules is the same but two classes of Sanitary Supervisors have been made in Jammu Municipality - one of a lower grade and other of a selection/higher grade - and, accordingly, in Jammu Municipality the pay scales for the post of Sanitary Supervisors though one scale is less than those of Sanitary Supervisors working in Srinagar Municipality, but the fact remains that the other grade of Sanitary Supervisors in Jammu Municipality is higher than that of Sanitary Supervisors working in Srinagar Municipality and, as such, there is no violation of the rules of equal pay for equal work.
6.
It has also been pleaded that the nature of working and hours of duty of the petitioners and those of Sanitary Supervisors working in Srinagar Municipality could not be same in view of the density of population and climatic conditions.
The evaluation of duties and the responsibilities of the respective posts are not the same.
The functioning of two posts may appear to be the same or similar, but there is a difference in degree in the performance of the duties.
The quantity and quality of the work is also different.
7.
The respondents have further pleaded that the appointments and service conditions of Sanitary Supervisors working in Jammu Municipality are different than that of Sanitary Supervisors working in Srinagar Municipality.
In Srinagar Municipality there is only one running grade of 900-1830, whereas in Jammu Municipality there are two grades - one is Rs. 800-1500 and the other is Rs. 1150-2050, just to provide avenue of promotion to the staff and to remove stagnation.
The higher grade in Jammu Municipality for Sanitary Supervisors has been kept and made available and is to be treated as an incentive to those persons who are to be promoted to the higher grade.
So the question of equal pay for equal work does not arise in this case as Jammu Municipality is providing better incentives and service conditions for promotion to Sanitary Supervisors rather than in Srinagar Municipality.
8.
The respondents have further while replying ground (a) of challenge pleaded that the same is wrong and have denied that the treatment of the petitioners by the answering respondents is arbitrary, mala fide and discriminatory.
9.
In ground (b) they have stated that the petitioners are not being deprived of their fundamental right of equal pay for equal work as enshrined in the Constitution.
10.
With regard to ground (c) it has been pleaded by the respondents that the same is wrong and untenable.
The appointments and working conditions of the Sanitary Supervisors working in Jammu Municipality are different and better than those working in Srinagar Municipality.
The petitioners are not being paid less than the Sanitary Supervisors working in Srinagar Municipality.
The petition is false, frivolous and vexatious and merits no consideration.
The respondents have prayed for dismissal of the same with costs.
11.
The mater came up for arguments on 19th February '98.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length.
Before I venture to appreciate the arguments advanced by the learned counsel for the parties, I would like to place on record the constitutional mandate regarding the caption "equal pay for equal work for both men and women."
12.
This being accepted as a "constitutional goal" capable of being achieved through constitutional remedies, his Lordships Hon'ble Justice Chinnappa Reddy, Judge while delivering a judgment which is reported as AIR 1982 SC 879 (at P 881 of AIR) observed :  "It is true that the principle of `equal pay for equal work' is not expressly declared by our Constitution to be a fundamental right.
But it certainly is a constitutional goal.
Article 39(d) of the Constitution proclaims `equal pay for equal work for both men and women' as a Directive Principle of State Policy.
`Equal pay for equal work for both men and women' means equal pay for equal work for everyone and as between sexes.
Directive Principles, has been pointed out in some of the judgments of this court have to be read into the fundamental rights as a matter of interpretation.
Article 14 of the Constitution enjoins the State not to deny any person equality before the law or the equal protection of the laws and Article 16 declares that there shall be equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters relating to employment or appointment to any Office under the State.
These equality clauses of the Constitution must mean something to everyone.
To the vast majority of the people the equality clauses of the Constitution would mean nothing if they are unconcerned with the work they do and the pay they get.
To them the equality clauses will have some substance if equal work means equal pay."
His Lordship has further observed :  "It is well known that there can be and there are different grades in a service, with varying qualification for entry into a particular grade, the higher grade often being a promotional avenue for officers of the lower grade.
The higher qualifications for the higher grade which may be either academic qualifications or experience based on length of service reasonably sustain the classification of the officers into two grades with different scales of pay.
The principle of equal pay for equal work would be an abstract doctrine not attracting Article 14 if sought to be applied to them."
In 4 SC Cases 225 at Para 712 their Lordship Justice Hedge and Mukherjee, Judges in Keshavanada Bharti v. State of Kerala have observed that Article 39(d) of the Constitution proclaims "equal pay for equal work".
This Article and other like provisions in the Directive Principles are "conscience of our Constitution."
They are rooted in social justice.
They were intended to bring about a socio-economic transformation in our society.
13.
Similarly their Lordships Justice Shelat and Justice Grover at Para 596 of the said judgment which is corresponding to AIR 1973 SC 1451 at Para 728 have observed :  "The Constitution seeks to fulfil basic needs of the common man and to change the structure of society."
Their Lordships have further observed :  "The dominant objective in view was to ameliorate and improve the lot of the common man and to bring about a socio-economic justice."
In matters of employment the Government of a socialist State must protect the weaker sections.
It must be ensured that there is no exploitation of poor and ignorant.
It is the duty of the State to see that the under-privileged or weaker sections get their dues.
Even if they have voluntarily accepted the employment on unequal terms, the State should not deny their basic rights of equal treatment.
It is against this background that the principle of "equal pay for equal work" has to be construed in the first place.
Second, this principle has no mechanical application in every case of similar work.
It has to be read into Art. 14 of the Constitution.
Art. 14 permits reasonable classification founded on different basis.
It is now well established that the classification can be based on some qualities or characteristic of persons grouped together and not in others who are left out.
Those qualities or characteristics must, of course, have a reasonable relation to the object sought to be achieved.
In service matters, merit or experience could be the proper basis for classification to promote efficiency in administration.
He or she learns also by experience as much as by other means.
It cannot be denied that the quality of work performed by persons of longer experience is superior than the work of newcomers."
His Lordship Justice Chinnappa Reddy in the Judgment (supra) AIR 1982 SC 879 has also observed that the classification of the officers into two grades with different scales of pay based either on academic qualification or experience based on length of service is sustainable.
14.
Apart from that, higher pay scales to avoid stagnation or resultant frustration for lack of promotional avenues is very common in career service.
There is selection grade for District Judges.
There is senior time scale in Indian Administrative Service.
There is super time scale in other like services.
The entitlement to these higher pay sales depends upon seniority-cum-merit or merit-cum-seniority.
The differentiation so made in the same cadre will not amount to discrimination.
The classification based on experience is a reasonable classification.
It is a rational nexus with the objective thereof.
To hold otherwise, it would be detrimental to the interest of the service itself.
15.
So with this academic background in nutshell about the doctrine of "equal pay for equal work," I further analyse the matter in view of the arguments advanced and in view of the pleadings made before me.
It may be noted that the petition moved by the petitioners is not sustainable and maintainable in the eyes of law because the nature of work of Sanitary Supervisors is different in both the Municipalities, though they are designated with the same nomenclature.
The very fact that as per creation/existing strength/sanctioned strength of the Sanitary Supervisory in Srinagar Municipality at Serial No. 86 of 1987-88 budget produced before me, there are 90 posts in the grade of Rs. 900-1830.
The very fact that there are 90 Sanitary Supervisors in Srinagar Municipality as compared to 28 in the grade of Rs. 800-1500 and 7 in the grade of Rs. 1150-20-50 i.e. total number of Sanitary Supervisors in Jammu Municipality are only 35, which give a viewed picture that the volume of work entrusted to the Sanitary Supervisors of Jammu Municipality is obviously lessor as compared to Srinagar Municipality.
Secondly, from population point of view also,srinagar Municipality is having more population that that of Jammu Minicipality and topographically also Srinagar City is more dirty than Jammu Municipality/City, obviously Jammu Municipality/City has a topographical position that with a shower the whole Jammu town is washed and all the dirt and filth runs down the drains and that leaves the Jammu Municipality a cleaner and the work load is also lesser.
On the other hand, Srinagar Municipality/Town gets drowned in the snow and rain water, and to clean Srinagar City the help of dewatering pumps is the routine nature of work.
The work load/supervision of the Sanitary Supervisors in Srinagar Municipality as such is heavier than that of Sanitary Supervisors in Jammu Municipality.
The pays/grades in Jammu Municipality are also higher than those of Srinagar Municipality, as the grade which finally the Sanitary Supervisors of Jammu Municipality are entitled is Rs. 1150-2050 and, on the other hand, the parity which they claim with the Srinagar Municipality are having pay scales of Rs. 900-1830.
In fact, the case should have been before this Court that the Srinagar Municipality people should have projected their claim on the ground of equal pay for equal work vis-a-vis Jammu Municipality people, but the irony would have it that it is the Jammu Municipality Sanitary Supervisors who claim and filed the present petition.
The learned counsel for the respondents Mr. SS Nanda has referred to me AIR 1988 SC 1291 :  "11.
In this case the differentiation has been sought to be justified in view of the nature and the types of the work done, that is, on intelligible basis.
The same amount of physical work may entail different quality of work, some more sensitive, some requiring more tact, some less - it varies from nature and culture of employment.
The problem about equal pay cannot always be translated into a mathematical formula.
It has a rational nexus with the object to be sought for, as reiterated before a certain amount of value judgment of the administrative authorities who are charged with fixing the pay scale has to be left with them and it cannot be interfered with by the Court unless it is demonstrated that either it is irrational or based on no basis or arrived at mala fide either in law or in fact.
In the light of the averments made and in the facts mentioned before, it is not possible to say that the differentiation is based on no rational nexus with the object sought for to be achieved.
In that view of the matter this application must fail and it is accordingly dismissed without any order as to costs."
Mr. SS Nanda has referred to me AIR 1989 SC 19:  "The first question regarding entitlement to the pay scale admissible to Section Officers should not detain us longer.
The answer to the question depends upon several factors.
It does not just depend upon either the nature of work or volume of work done by Bench Secretaries.
Primarily it requires among others, evaluation of duties and responsibilities of the respective posts.
More often functions of two posts may appear to be the same or similar, but there may be difference in degrees in the performance.
The quantity of work may be the same, but quality may be different that cannot be determined by relying upon averments in affidavits of interested parties.
The equation of posts or equation of pay must be left to the Executive Government.
It must be determined by expert bodies like Pay Commission.
They would be the best judge to evaluate the nature of duties and responsibilities of posts.
If there is any such determination by a Commission or Committee, the Court should normally accept it.
The Court should not try to tinker with such equivalent unless it is shown that it was made with extraneous consideration.
18.
In the present case, it is true that at one time, Bench Secretaries were paid more emoluments than Section Officers.
But it is not known on what basis they were paid in the higher pay scale and treated as a superior class to Section Officers.
The successive Pay Commission and even Pay Rationalisation Committee, however, found no support to their superior claim.
The Commissions and Committee have evaluated the respective duties and responsibilities of the two posts.
It was found that Section Officers perform onerous duties and bear greater responsibilities than Bench Secretaries.
We cannot go against that opinion and indeed we must accept that opinion.
The Bench Secretaries, therefore, cannot claim as of right the pay scale admissible to Section Officers."
So in the light of the judgment referred at the bar and submissions made, it has been desired by their lordship of the Apex Court that the question of equation of posts or equation of pay must be left to the Executive Government.
It must be determined by expert bodies like Pay Commission.
They would be the best Judge to evaluate the nature of duties and responsibilities of posts.
If there is any such determination by a Commission or Committee, the court should normally accept it.
The court should not try to tinker with such equivalence unless it is shown that it was made with extraneous considerations.
16.
So in the light of above observations and conclusions arrived at, I do not find any force on the petition which as such is being dismissed.
I leave the parties to bear their respective costs.
Petition dismissed.