GS Singhvi, J - The only substantive issue raised in this petition is whether the provisions contained in Appendix B appended to the Haryana Development and Panchayats Department (Group C) Service Rules, 1980 under which 1/3rd of the posts of Social Education and Panchayat Officers meant to be filled by promotion have been earmarked for graduates is ultra vires to Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
We have heard Shri RK Malik, learned counsel for the petitioner and Shri Jaswant Singh, learned Deputy Advocate General and have perused the impugned provisions which is extracted below :-  APPENDIX B Serial No.
Designation of the posts Academic qualifications and experience, if any, for direct recruitment.
Academic qualification and experience, if any for appointment other than by direct recruitment 1 2 3 4 xx xx xx xx xx xx STAFF POSTED IN BLOCKS + + + 1.
Social Education and Panchayat Officer + 50% by direct recruitment and 50% by promotion i) One-third of posts by promotion from amongst Graduates + (i) Graduates of a recognised University This condition will be relaxable in case of Gram-Sachieves holding a diploma in Rural Service awarded by National Council of Rural Higher-Education.
Gram Sachieves having seven years experience as such(ii) Two-Third No. of posts by promotion from amongst Matriculate Gram Sachieves having four years experience as such.
+ (ii) Hindi upto Matric Standard.
+ (iii) Two years experience of farming and certificate from the Deputy Commissioner would be necessary.
It appears from the record that the petitioners succeeded in convincing the Court to entertain the writ petition on the basis of decision of Supreme Court in Punjab State Electricity Board v. Ravinder Kumar Sharma, 1986(4) S.V.L.R.
(L) 60.
However, at the time of hearing of the petition, Shri RK Malik frankly and fairly conceded that in view of the later decision of the Apex Court, he is not in a position to persuade the Court to hold that the impugned provisions should be declared unconstitutional.
2.
Otherwise also, we are convinced that the prescription of ratio between Graduate and non-Graduate Gram Sachieves for promotion to the post of Social Education and Panchayat Officer cannot be struck down on the ground of violation of the doctrine of equality embodied in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India because it is a settled principle of law that educational qualifications can constitute valid basis for providing additional avenues of promotion to a particular class of persons.
In The State of Jammu and Kashmir v. Triloki Nath Khosa and others, AIR 1974 Supreme Court 1; Mohammad Shujat Ali and others v. Union of India and others, AIR 1974 Supreme Court 1631: Roop Chand and others v. Delhi Development Authority and others, JT 1988(4) SC 114; P Murugesan and others v. State of Tamil Nadu and others, JT 1993(2) SC 115 : 1993(2) SCT 416 (SC); TR Kothandaraman etc. etc. v. Tamil Nadu Water Supply & Drainage Board & Ors., JT 1994(6) SC 157 : 1994(4) SCT 763 (SC) and Rajasthan State Electricity Board Accountants Association, Jaipur v. Rajasthan State Electricity Board and another, JT 1997(2) SC 342 : 1997(2) SCT 18 (SC), their Lordships of the Supreme Court have upheld the rules prescribing a particular ratio of posts for promotion from amongst those who possessed higher qualifications.
3.
In this case, it has not been shown by Shri Malik that the qualification of graduation has no nexus with the duties required to be performed by Social Education and Panchayat Officers.
Therefore, we cannot strike down the impugned provisions on the ground that the prescription of the qualification of graduation for 1/3rd of the promotion quota posts is irrational and arbitrary.
4.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.