Sat Pal, J - This writ petition has bee filed on behalf of four petitioners namely Mohinder Singh, Sat Pal Singh, Jagsir Singh and Bachittar Singh.
In this writ petition the petitioners have prayed for issuance of directions to the respondents to send the petitioners to join Patwar Training Course at Jalandhar.
2.
Mr. Anil Sharma, DAG, Punjab has raised preliminary objection that petitioner No. 1, namely Mohan Singh had earlier filed writ petition bearing No. 2859/93 Des Raj and others v. State of Punjab and that writ petition was dismissed as withdrawn without seeking the permission of the Court to file a fresh writ petition on 451993.
He, therefore, contends that the present writ petition filed by petitioner Mohan Singh is liable to be dismissed on this short ground.
3.
Mr. Brar, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the said petitioner, however, submits that some of the writ petitioners pertaining to the said writ petition No. 2859/93 were sent for Patwar Training, though, in their case also, the writ petition was dismissed as withdrawn on the 4th of May, 1993.
4.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties I am of the view that there is force in the contention raised by the learned DAG, Punjab.
Admittedly, petitioner-Mohan Singh had not sought permission of the Court to file a fresh writ petition when the earlier writ petition bearing No. 2859/1993 filed by him and others was dismissed as withdrawn.
The petition on behalf of petitioner-Mohan Singh is, therefore, not maintainable.
In this connection reference may be made to a judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Avinash Nagra v. Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti etc., JT 1996(10) SC 461 : 1997(1) SCT 852 (SC).
In this case, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that the second writ petition was not maintainable where the writ petitioner had earlier filed the writ petition and withdrew the same without the permission of the Court with liberty to file the second writ petition.
Accordingly, the writ petition filed by Mohan Singh is dismissed.
With regard to other three writ petitioners namely Sat Pal Singh, Jagsir Singh and Bachhitar Singh, the learned counsel for the petitioners submits that all these petitions were placed in the waiting list and since eight persons did not join the post, these petitioners should have been appointed against the posts which became vacant for non-joining of the eight persons.
The learned counsel further submits that four persons including three persons whose names like the petitioners were also placed in the waiting list namely Baljinder Singh, Jasbir Singh and Daulat Ram had filed writ petition bearing Civil Writ Petition No. 13127 of 1992, Balvinder Singh and others v. State of Punjab and others and in that writ petition, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the State gave a statement that the petitioners would be sent to Patwar Course at Jalandhar in the coming session and as a result of that statement, that writ petition was dismissed as infructuous.
The learned counsel, therefore, contends that the petitioners have been discriminated inasmuch as three persons in the waiting list who were similarly situated, were granted the relief on the basis of statement given by the learned counsel of the State whereas the same relief has been denied to the petitioners.
The learned counsel also submits that the averment of the respondents in the written statement that the waiting list had expired after the expiry of six months is not correct as in terms of the instructions issued by the State Government, the waiting list will hold good even beyond the period of six months in case a candidate declines offer of joining and post remains vacant.
In support of this submission, the learned counsel has placed reliance on a judgment of this Court in Raghbir Chand Sharma v. State of Punjab, 1992(1) RSJ 195 : 1992(1) SCT 53 (P&H).
5.
Mr. Sharma, the learned DAG, however, submits that the candidates in the waiting list have no vested right to be appointed except to the limited extent that when a candidate selected against the existing vacancy, does not join for some reason and the waiting list is still operative.
In support of this submission, the learned counsel has placed reliance on a recent judgment of the Supreme Court in Surinder Singh and others v. State of Punjab, 1997(4) RSJ 57 : 1997(4) SCT 395 (P&H).
The learned DAG further submits on instruction that even at present there is no vacancy for sending the writ petitioners for Patwar Training.
6.
I have given my thoughtful consideration to the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties and have perused the record.
A Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court in the Shankarsan Dash v. Union of India, AIR 1991 SC 1612 : 1991(2) SCT 555 (SC) held that the inclusion of candidate's names in the merit list does not confer any right to be selected.
It is true that the names of the above- mentioned three writ petition were placed in the waiting list and as held by the Supreme Court in the case of Surinder Singh (supra), the candidates in the waiting list have no vested right to be appointed except to the limited extent that when a candidate selected against the existing vacancy does not join for some reason and the waiting list is still operative.
In the written statement, it has been clearly stated that the waiting list was not inoperative when the petitioners sought the relief to be sent for Patwar Training.
In the present case, I have find that three persons namely Baljinder Singh, Jasbir Singh and Bhagat Ram had filed the writ petition bearing CWP 13127 of 1992 and in that writ petition, the learned counsel for the State had given a statement that these petitioners would be sent for Patwar Training in the next course and on the statement of the learned counsel for the State, the writ petition was dismissed as infructuous.
From the records, I find that Baljinder Singh had obtained 515 marks, Jasbir Singh 51 marks and Daulat Ram had obtained 48 marks.
Out of the above mentioned three writ petitioners Sat Pal Singh had obtained 495 marks and as such he cannot be denied the relief particularly when a person who had obtained 48 marks (less than the marks obtained by Sat Pal Singh) was sent for Patwar Training on the basis of the statement given by the learned counsel of the State.
Accordingly, the writ petition on behalf of petitioner No. 2 namely Sat Pal Singh is allowed.
As regards the petitioners No. 3 and 4, I find that petitioner No. 3 Jagsir Singh had obtained 45 marks and petitioner No. 4 Bachhitar singh had obtained 47 marks.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has not brought to my notice any case where a person who had obtained less marks than these writ petitioners, had been sent for Patwar Training.
In view of these facts, the writ petition on behalf of petitioners No. 3 and 4 namely Jagsir Singh and Bachhitar Singh is dismissed.
Since three persons from the waiting list were sent for Patwar Training on the basis of the statement given by the learned counsel of the State, petitioners No. 3 and 4 namely Jagsir Singh and Bachhitar Singh shall also be at liberty to approach the authority concerned to consider their case on the basis of the statement given by the learned counsel of the State in CWP 13127 of 1992 and it is hoped that the authority concerned shall consider the case of these petiteness sympathetically.
7.
In view of the above discussion, the writ petition on behalf of Sat Pal is allowed and the respondents are directed to send him for Patwar Course at the next session.
Writ Petition on behalf of other petitioners namely Mohan Singh, Jagsir Singh and Bachhitar Singh is, however, dismissed.
As stated herein above, petitioners Jagsir Singh and Bachhitar Singh shall be however, at liberty to approach the authority concerned to seek the relief which has been sought in the present writ petition.
The parties are, however, left to bear their own costs.