THB Chalapathi, J - Invoking the extra-ordinary jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner filed this writ petition seeking issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to admit Freedom Fighters pension to the petitioner from the date of his making application.
2.
According to the petitioner, he joined the Army on June 25, 1941 during the Second World War and while serving in Burma he was taken as a Prisoner of War (hereinafter referred to as `the POW') by the Japanese with effect from 1521942 to 551945.
According to him, during his period as the POW, he joined the Indian National Army (for short called the INA).
At the end of the Second World War, he was recovered on 551945 and he was dismissed from service with effect from 27.2.1946 with character assessed "BAD" and after independence the assessment of BAD character was cancelled and instead he was discharged with GOOD character with effect from 27.2.1946, after paying full pay and allowances.
Subsequently, the petitioner re-enrolled in the Army in East Punjab Militia on 13.9.1948.
From there he was transferred to Border Scouts and then transferred to Artillary where he served till retirement.
He was transferred to pension with effect from September 20, 1968.
According to the petitioner, he was entitled to Freedom Fighters Pension Scheme, 1972 on account of his joining the INA during the Second World War and, therefore, he applied for the same on 2231975 but did not get any reply.
He also sent another application on 2011989.
To that also he did not get any reply.
According to the petitioner, the Artillery Records, Nasik Road Camp, by their letter No. 9056277/W&R/Gen-1/L-3/6/NE dated 13101989, confirmed that the petitioner was in the personnel of the INA as intimated by the second respondent, ASC Record (Sups) in the letter dated 1291989.
Thus, according to the petitioner, since he joined the INA when he was under detention as the POW during the Second World War, he is entitled to the pension under Freedom Fighters Pension Scheme, 1972.
3.
The first respondent, i.e. the Union of India, filed a written statement contending, inter alia, that the petitioner was granted pension prospectively by giving him benefit of doubt keeping in view the judgment of the Supreme Court in Writ Petition No. 153 of 1992 (Mukand Lal Bhandari and others v. Union of India).
It is further averred that the petitioner who is already in receipt of pension from 18111989, is seeking pension from an ante date on the basis of the decision of the Supreme Court in ML Bhandari's case (supra).
It is further stated that even the Supreme Court indicated the reasons why pension should not be granted retrospectively.
It is further averred that since the petitioner was granted pension by giving the benefit of doubt, he cannot seek the pension with retrospective effect.
Therefore, it is submitted that the writ petition be dismissed.
4.
Admittedly, the petitioner served the Indian Army under the British rule.
During the Second World War he was taken as POW by the Japanese and was detained.
According to the petitioner, he joined the INA while in detention as the POW.
There is no acceptable material to prove this fact.
It is only an assertion of the petitioner.
However, the petitioner was granted pension with effect from 18111989 giving him the benefit of doubt.
Therefore, in my opinion, the petitioner cannot claim pension with the retrospective effect when he made the application.
In this context, it is useful to refer to the decision of the Supreme Court in Civil Appeal arising out of S.L.P.
(C) No. 25053 of 1995 (Union of India v. M.R.
Chelliah Thevar), wherein it has been held as follows :-  "On behalf of the Union of India strong reliance was placed on the decision of the Division Bench of this Court dated 24th April, 1995.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondent placed reliance on an earlier judgment of this Court in Mukund Lal Bhandari and others v. Union of India and others, 1993 Supp.
(3) SCC 2, as well as the decision in Amarnath Malhotra and others v. Union of India, dated 19th October, 1994.
The distinction, however, is that in the case relied on by the Union of India the respondents were granted the benefit under the policy not because it was a clear case of the respondents being freedom fighters but because benefit of doubt was given and hence the pension was restricted from the date of the order and not the date of application.
In the two cases relied on by the respondent there was no question of the benefit having been founded on a finding of fact which did not clearly establish that the petitioners were freedom fighters but on the liberal ground of giving them the benefit of doubt and restricting it from the date of order.
We are, therefore, of the opinion that there is a distinction between the decision relied on by the learned Additional Solicitor General on behalf of the Union of India and two decisions relied on by the respondent.
In the instant case, since the benefit of doubt was given and the status of freedom fighter was recognised on that basis, the case would be covered by the first mentioned decision dated 24th April, 1995 (Union of India v. Ganesh Chandra Dolai and others).
In the result, the appeal is allowed and it is directed that the benefit will be given to the respondent from the date of order and not the date of application."
5.
Therefore, in view of the authority of the Apex Court (supra), I am of the view that the petitioner has been rightly granted pension with effect from 18111989, the date of the order vide Annexure PS He is not entitled to the pension either from the date of Freedom Fighter Pension Scheme, 1972 or from the date of filing of the original application i.e. 2231975, since it has not been specifically proved to the satisfaction of the Authorities or to the satisfaction of this Court that the petitioner really joined the INA when he was detained as POW.
In this view of the matter, I do not find any merit in this writ petition.
6.
The result is that the writ petition fails and is, therefore, accordingly dismissed.
Petition dismissed.