TS Doabia, J - Heard learned counsels.
Petition admitted.
With the consent of the parties, the petition was accordingly taken up for disposal.
The grievance of the petitioners is that when they joined the services, they had an avenue of promotion.
It is submitted that on account of amendment made in the rules, the avenue of promotion has been withdrawn.
In these circumstances, petitioners submit that a direction be issued to the respondent State to take remedial measures.
The basic reliance is being placed on a decision given by the Supreme Court of India in the case reported as Raghunath Prasad Singh v. Secretary, Home (Police) Department, Government of Bihar and others, AIR 1988 Supreme Court 1033.
In the aforementioned judgment, it was observed that reasonable promotional opportunities should be available to every wing of public service.
The relevant observations are as under :  "Reasonable promotional opportunities should be available in every wing of public service.
That generates efficiency in service and fosters the appropriate attitude to grow for achieving excellence in service.
In the absence of promotional prospects, the service is bound to degenerate and stagnation kills the desire to serve properly.
We would, therefore, direct the State of Bihar to provide at least two promotional opportunities to the officers of the State Police in the wireless organisation within six months from today by appropriate amendments of Rules.
In case the State of Bihar fails to comply with this direction, it should within two months thereafter, give a fresh opportunity to personnel in the Police wireless organisation to exercise option to revert to the general cadre and that benefit should be extended to everyone in the wireless organisation."
The judgment given by the Supreme Court of India is law of the land.
Reference be made to Article 141 of the Constitution of India.
What was said by the Supreme Court of India in the aforementioned case would, therefore, be binding on the State authorities.
They would accordingly take steps with a view to provide promotional avenues.
It be seen that such intention was expressed by the Supreme Court of India in other cases also.
One such case is reported as M.P Junior Engineers' Association and Sangarsh Samiti and others v. State of Madhya Pradesh and another, AIR 1990 SC 2010.
This writ petition is disposed of with a direction that respondent-State would take notice of the observations made by the Supreme Court of India in Raghunath Prasad Singh v. Secretary, Home (Police) Department, Government of Bihar and others, AIR 1988 Supreme Court 1033 (supra) and take remedial measures within a period of two months.
Before parting with this order, it be seen that one J.R Sharma to whom reference has been made in the additional supplementary affidavit, was said to have been given higher assignments even though he did not possess the basic qualification.
It is stated that his qualification was not better than the petitioner.
The benefits has been given to him only on the basis that he is not a resident of Jammu and Kashmir and on the basis of seniority alone.
If this be the position, then there was no justifiable ground to not to give similar treatment to the petitioners.
This aspect of the matter be also taken note of.
The petition is accordingly disposed of with the observations made above.
Petition dismissed.