KK Srivastava, J - These two Letters Patent Appeals (Nos. 230 and 775 of 1994) are directed against the judgment dated 7101993 passed in Civil Writ Petition No. 4442 of 1982 by a learned Single Judge (Hon'ble Mr. Justice HS Bedi) of this Court.
These two appeals are being disposed of by this common judgment as they involve common questions of facts and law.
Dr. Hardev Singh and Dr. BS Tuli, the writ petitioners approached this Court by filing the Civil Writ Petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, praying for issuance of a direction to the State of Punjab (writ respondent and appellant of LPA No. 230/1994) to grant the benefits of military service rendered by them while on Short Service Commission, towards seniority, increments in pay and for consideration of their cases for promotion to the higher posts.
Dr. Hardev Singh and Dr. BS Tuli, both the petitioners, were admitted to the Government Medical College, Patiala, in MBBS Course, when the Principal of Government Medical College, Patiala, put up a general notice for the information of all concerned students that the interviews/selection of the final year MBBS students for grant of Short Service Commission (on probation) will be held in the office of the Principal on 10-11/12/1968 to medical students during the final year MBBS Course for the year 1968-69 (vide copy Annexure P-13).
The Punjab Government issued a policy vide letter No. 3068-4 G.S.I.
64/10931 dated 641964.
According to the petitioners, this policy was reproduced in the manual of instructions on service matters and was quoted in para 3 of the writ petition, which read as under :-  "18.
Special provision for Engineering and Medical Students with a view to encouraging engineering students to volunteer for short service regular commission, it has been decided that pre-final and final year students of the Engineering College in the Punjab shall be appointed as Temporary/Assistant Engineers in the relevant branches of the State Public Works Department from the date of the grant of provisional Short Service Regular Commission to them, and they should be deemed to have been seconded to military duty from the said dates.
Special posts should be created for this purpose if sufficient vacancies are not available for the appointment of such persons as Temporary Assistant Engineers with the sanctioned cadre of the various branches of the Department.
Where such candidates have been appointed against the vacancies within the cadre, the Administrative Department will be competent to create a comparable number of posts for making purely temporary appointments against them.
On their release from military service, these persons will be absorbed in the posts on which they were originally appointed and the officials temporarily appointed and the officials temporarily appointed against these posts will be liable to reversion or discharge.
xxx xxx xxx xxx x x x x x x x x x x According to the existing service rules of the P.S.E.
Class II, a candidate is eligible for appointment as Temporary Assistant Engineer only if he possesses a degree in Civil, Mechanical or Electrical Engineering, but this qualification will be deemed to have been relaxed in favour of persons appointed as Temporary (Assistant Engineers on the grant of Provisional Short Service) Regular Commission.
In order, however, to ensure that the persons who have already joined the armed forces in the Corps of Engineers Signals and Electrical and Mechanical Engineers after obtaining degrees from Engineering Colleges in the State are not placed at a disadvantage vis-a-vis pre-final year students, such persons on their release from military service shall be absorbed against the reserved vacancies in the Engineering service in the relevant branch of the State Public Works Department and should have seniority priority absorption over the persons who joined while still pre-final and final year students.
The concessions contained in this paragraph will also apply mutatis mutandis to medical students of the medical institutions in Punjab."
Relying upon this policy, the petitioners applied for grant of Short Service Commission (on probation) being medical students in MBBS Course.
Petitioner- Hardev Singh was informed vide letter dated 2131969 (copy Annexure P12) that he had been selected for the Short Service Commission in the Army Medical Corps and granted the rank of IInd Lieutenant w.e.f.
11.12.1968 under the terms and conditions laid down in Army instructions dated 981963.
He was entitled to draw a consolidated pay of Rs. 400/- per month as per the terms laid down in para 6 of the Army Instructions dated 981963 and was required to appear in the next final MBBS examination.
He was asked to intimate the date of commencement and termination of final MBBS Examination immediately on receipt of the date-sheet and the result of the examination duly endorsed by the Dean/Principal, as soon as it is announced.
It is averred in the writ petition that petitioner No. 2/Dr.
BS Tuli also received such an offer and this fact is not disputed by the State of Punjab as well as the appellants (Dr. Sudesh Gulati and Dr. Satish Kumar Verma) of LPA No. 775/1994.
Both the petitioners successfully completed the final examination of MBBS and intimation thereof was sent by the Principal of the Government Medical College, Patiala, to the Director General Armed Forces, Medical Services, New Delhi vide letter dated 1821969 (copy Annexure P-14).
Both the petitioners were given Short Service Commission (Regular) by the military authorities w.e.f.
25469 and 151969 respectively.
They earned 5 years of approved military service during the period 1969-1974.
In May 1973, the petitioners, who expected their release from the army after the expiry of the period of Short Service Commission, applied for appointment to the P.C.M.S.-II on the basis of the particulars in an advertisement published by the Punjab Public Service Commission.
They sent the applications through the army authorities.
Undisputedly, both of them were selected for the post of doctors in the P.C.M.S.-II.
They were released from the army some time in April, 1974 and they joined the P.C.M.S.-II on 26474 and 5.4.74 respectively.
The petitioners were under the impression that they were selected against the reserved vacancies for the released army personnel, but it was revealed to them that the Punjab Public Service Commission had selected them against the general vacancies and not against the aforesaid reserved vacancies.
Petitioner No. 1/Dr.
Hardev Singh made a representation to the Government seeking benefit of military service towards pay and seniority on the ground that he was seconded to the army during the National Emergency.
This representation was rejected vide memo dated 121982 addressed to the Director, Health and Family Welfare, Punjab, a copy of which was later on endorsed to the petitioner-Dr. Hardev Singh vide endorsement No. 55-E-3-5- PB/4412 dated 2561982.
The petitioners had in the first instance pressed their relief for being appointed against the reserved vacancies, which claim was also rejected by the State Government vide memo dated 30101980 (copy Annexure P4).
It was intimated to the petitioners that the benefit of military service towards seniority and pay was admissible to those doctors who joined military service during the period 1111962 to 1011968 when the period of emergency came to an end and since the case of the petitioner did not fall in the said category, his case was consequently rejected.
In the meantime, the Punjab Government issued a Circular Letter No. 5756-SII(3)-70 dated 5101970 (copy of which has been placed on record as Annexure P8) on the subject, "Demobilished Army Personnel - Concessions when recruited against unreserved vacancies".
The Government decided that where a released Army Personnel has qualified against a non-reserved vacancy and has been appointed against a general unreserved vacancy in the first instance, he should be given an option (only at the time of first appointment) to accept a reserved vacancy even if it occurs subsequent to his appointment.
The circular further said, "This will automatically give the benefit of concessions like seniority etc. in the manner specified in the Rules"......
It appears that the Director, Health Services, Punjab, acting pursuant to the said circular dated 5101970 informed petitioner No. 1/Dr.
Hardev Singh vide his memo dated 131977 that he could exercise his option to accept the reserved vacancy for the army officers (as quoted above), even if it occurred subsequent to his appointment for the purpose of army service benefit, so that his case for grant of such benefit towards civil service be examined.
A copy of this letter has been placed on record as Annexure P-16.
Petitioner-Hardev Singh sent his reply to the Director, Health and Family Welfare, Punjab (vide letter Annexure P-17) exercising his option to accept the reserved vacancy for the army officers as per the terms laid down in the said circular.
The State Government, however, did not consider his case as also the case of petitioner-Dr. BS Tuli, who filed the aforesaid writ petition.
3.
The State of Punjab (now appellant in LPA No. 230/1994) filed the written statement admitting the averment of the petitioners regarding grant of Short Service Commission to them.
It was also admitted that they passed the final year MBBS examination in the year 1969 and applied for Short Service Commission.
It was also admitted that they served in the military during the period 1969 to 1974.
The stand of the State of Punjab has been specifically mentioned in Para 9 of the written statement as under :-  "It is correct that the petitioners had represented for giving them the benefit of the military service.
Their representations were considered and rejected by the Govt.
It is correct that benefit of military service was granted to Dr. Sukhpal Kaur, Dental Assistant Surgeon and Dr. Avtar Singh vide Punjab Govt. Order No. 1(57) IHB-II/24427 dated 13101980 and 9913-6HBI- 78/23857 dated 671978 respectively under the relevant rules - Demobilised Indian Armed Forces Personnel Reservation of Vacancies in the Punjab State Technical (Medical and Engineering) Services Rules 1968 and 1976".
These rules are applicable to those who were commissioned to Army or who had joined the Armed Forces of the Union, as the case may be on or after the 1st day of November, 1962, but before the 10th day of January, 1968.
The petitioners had joined Army on 111268 ie after the 10th day of January, 1968.
As such, these rules are not applicable to the petitioners.
The representations of the petitioners are not covered under these rules."
The respondent-State alleged that since the petitioners had not joined the military during the period of national emergency commencing on 1111962 and ending on 1011968, their case could not be considered under the Demobilised Indian Armed Forces Personnel Reservation of Vacancies in the Punjab State Technical (Medical and Engineering Service) Rules, 1967 and 1976 (for short to be referred as "Demobilised Service Rules").
The learned Single Judge held that it is not the case of the petitioners or their counsel that they were entitled to the benefit of the Demobilised Service Rules, but their claim is based on the instructions of the State Government issued on 641964 vide letter No. 3068-4 GSI-64/10932.
The learned Single Judge found the case of the petitioners fully covered by the aforesaid policy/instructions and accordingly he allowed the writ petition and directed the State to treat the petitioners as State Government employees w.e.f.
11.12.1968 and that they shall be liable to receive all the benefits which flew therefrom, which will be calculated and conferred on them within a period of six months from the date of judgment.
The State of Punjab has assailed the correctness of the judgment in LPA No. 230/1994.
After the aforesaid judgment came to the knowledge of Dr. Sudesh Gulati and Dr. Satish Kumar Verma, who were likely to be affected by the grant of seniority to the writ petitioners, they approached this Court and filed LPA No. 775/1994.
The said appeal was admitted and directed to be listed along with LPA No. 230/1994 filed by the State of Punjab.
In LPA No. 775/1994, filed by Dr. Sudesh Gulati and Dr. Satish Kumar Verma, the State of Punjab/writ-respondent and the writ-petitioners (Dr. Hardev Singh and Dr. BS Tuli) were impleaded as respondents No. 1, 2 and 3 respectively.
Later on, under the orders of this Court, the State of Punjab in its LPA No. 230/1994 impleaded Dr. Sudesh Gulati and Dr. Satish Kumar Verma as respondents No. 3 and 4 respectively besides the writ petitioners (Dr. Hardev Singh and Dr. BS Tuli), who had been impleaded as respondents No. 1 and 2 respectively.
That is how these two LPAs have arisen against the aforesaid judgment of learned Single Judge.
4.
Case of the appellants in LPA No. 775 of 1994 is that the writ- petitioners, Dr. Hardev Singh and Dr. BS Tuli, were selected on 11.12.1968 while they were students of final year in the MBBS Course.
After completing the Short Service Commission in the army, they were released from the army in the year 1974.
They were selected against the non-reserved open vacancies of medical officers in the Punjab Civil Medical Service (P.C.M.S.-II).
The national emergency was lifted on 1011968 whereas the respondents-Dr. Hardev Singh and Dr. BS Tuli joined the army on 11.12.1968, i.e. much later than the lifting of the emergency.
The respondents aforesaid did not join the army during the imposition of emergency.
It was alleged that appellant No. 1/Dr.
Sudesh Gulati joined the P.C.M.S.-II as Medical Officer on ad hoc basis in the year 1969 and was later on appointed on regular basis in the year 1970.
Appellant No. 2-Dr. Satish Kumar Verma was selected in the same selection as Dr. Sudesh Gulati, but he was placed higher in order of merit than Dr. Sudesh Gulati.
Both the appellants, it is alleged are senior to the private respondents (Dr. Hardev Singh and BS Tuli).
These appellants further alleged that the learned Single Judge relied entirely on the instructions dated 641964 reproduced in Para 3 of the writ petition.
It is alleged that the said instructions were not reproduced correctly in Para 3 of the writ petition.
These appellants have annexed the copy of the instructions dated 641964 as Annexure A-1 and pointed out that from a perusal of the instructions (Annexure A-1), it is quite evident that there is a material difference in the two instructions, i.e. the one reproduced in Annexure A-1 and the others reproduced by the private respondents in Para 3(f) of their writ petition.
As a matter of fact, the appellants alleged, the instructions dated 641964 restricted the concession to the civilian employees and others, who joined the military service during the period of national emergency and further it was made applicable only to the engineering students.
The instructions dated 641964, it is alleged, are not applicable to the medical students.
They have further pointed out that the instructions reproduced by the private respondents are part of a consolidated circular embodying earlier instructions and they have deliberately and wilfully concealed the subject of these instructions, which itself restricts the benefit of the instructions to the persons who joined military service during the emergency.
A copy of the circular issued later on, i.e. on 2541966 (a part of which was reproduced in Para 3 of the writ petition) was annexed with the grounds of appeal as Annexure A-2.
This circular also showed that the concession was restricted to those persons who joined military service during the national emergency.
The case of these appellants is that even this circular is not applicable to the private respondents and no benefit could be granted to them under the same.
Apart from it, they have pointed out that the said circular wrongly stated that vide instructions dated 641964 it had been decided to grant benefits to medical students also.
They further submitted that the learned Single Judge had gone totally wrong in holding that Annexure P7 of the writ petition was in the nature of a letter of appointment of the private respondents, whereas this letter is the reply from the Principal, Government Medical College, Patiala, to a query raised by the Director, Health Services, Punjab vide document Annexure P-15 dated 3181970.
The Director Health Services had only asked for the numbers of MBBS students, who were seconded to the Indian Army during emergency.
According to these appellants, there is a reasonable and valid classification between the persons who joined the army during national emergency and the persons who joined the army after the national emergency was lifted.
We have heard learned counsel for the appellants in both the appeals as also learned Advocate General for the State/respondents.
We have also perused the judgment under appeal.
5.
It is common case of the appellants of the two appeals that the benefits of the military service earned by the writ petitioners/respondents could not be extended to them on the ground that they did not get seconded to the military service during the period of national emergency, which was lifted on 1011968.
The emergency was imposed on 26101962.
The period of emergency, according to the submission of learned counsel for the appellants, is to be taken w.e.f.
26101962 to 1011968.
Apart from this contention, the appellants-Dr. Sudesh Gulati and Dr. Satish Kumar Verma took the stand that the writ petitioners (Dr. Hardev Singh and Dr. BS Tuli) in their writ petition wrongly referred to the instructions of the Punjab Government contained in letter dated 641964 and as a matter of fact, the extract of the said letter which has been quoted in the writ petition, is from the compendium of instructions issued by the Punjab Government subsequently vide letter dated 2141966.
These appellants filed copies of the two letters as Annexures A-1 and A-2 respectively with the memo of appeals.
The argument of learned counsel for these appellants (Dr. Sudesh Gulati and Dr. Satish Kumar Verma) is that the instructions contained in letter 641964 firstly confined the benefits to the period aforesaid of the national emergency and secondly, to the engineering students only and its benefits were not extended to the medical students.
The policy was applied to the medical students later on vide letter dated 2141966.
So far as the applicability of the aforesaid instructions of the State Government which formulated the policy as contained in letter dated 641964 is concerned, it no doubt mentions in the subject, as would appear from the perusal of Annexure A-1 that the concession was confined during the period of emergency.
The subject noted in the circular letter dated 641964 (Annexure A-1) reads as under :-  "Concessions to civilian employees and others who join military service during the Emergency."
Before dealing with this aspect of the period of emergency referred to in the circular letter dated 641964, it may be pointed out that Shri AK Chopra, learned advocate appearing for the writ petitioners/respondents (Dr. Hardev Singh and Dr. BS Tuli) referred to the army instructions No. 9/S relating to the "Grant of Provisional Short Service Commission to Medical Students during the Final Year of MBBS Course," issued from New Delhi, Tuesday, May 21, 1963/Vaisakha 31, 1885.
These are the relevant instructions on the basis of which the Punjab Government formulated the policy and issued circular letters, which would be adverted to a little later.
In Para 14 of these instructions, it is provided, "This instruction shall remain in force for the duration of the Emergency only."
Shri AK Chopra, learned advocate for the writ petitioners also showed to us the copy of the amendment to Para 14 of the said instructions, incorporated by item No. 73.A.I.9/S/63, deleting the word `only' from line 2 of Para 14 and the following words were added :-  "and thereafter upto 31st December, 1969".
It further provided that the above amendment would be deemed to have been issued from the date of lifting of the emergency.
This amendment is noted as per case No.
13502/DG.AFMS/DGI-A/799/S/D(Med.
)M of F.(D) u.o.
No. 824- S/PA/1968 issued by G Sen, Dy.
Secy.
Thus, Para 14 of the army instructions aforesaid, after amendment would read as under :-  "This instruction shall remain in force for the duration of the emergency and thereafter upto 31.12.1969."
6.
This amendment in Para 14 of the said instruction will be deemed to have been issued from the date of lifting of the emergency, i.e. 1011968.
It implies that the aforesaid army instructions remained in force even after lifting of the emergency on 1011968, for the purpose of grant of Provisional Short Service Commission to medical students to the final year MBBS Course.
By subsequent amendments in Para 14 of the said instructions, vide Amendment No. 5 and Amendment No. 6, the dates were extended upto 31121970 and then upto 31.12.1971 respectively.
For the purpose of the instant case, Para 14 of the said instructions stood amended and was in force on the date when the writ petitioners were seconded to the Short Service Commission.
We, therefore, find no merit in the argument of the appellants (Dr. Sudesh Gulati and Dr. Satish Kumar Verma) that the writ petitioners (respondents of LPA No. 775/1994) could not get the concession of the military service as they were seconded to the military service after expiry of the national emergency on 1011968.
7.
A perusal of the Punjab Government Circular Letter No. 3068-4 GS-I- 64/10933 dated 641964, a copy of which has been placed on record of LPA No. 775/1994 as Annexure A-1, shows that these instructions were apparently issued with a view to encouraging engineering students to volunteer for Short Service Commissions.
Para 4 of the said annexure shows that the Government had decided to extend similar concessions to medical students of the medical institutions in the Punjab.
Para 4 reads as under :-  "It has also been decided to extend similar concessions to medical students of the medical institutions in the Punjab.
Instructions in that respect will be issued separately."
The Punjab Government Circular Letter No. 88-4GSI-66/9554 dated 21st April, 1966, issued from the Chief Secretary to the Government of Punjab, to all Heads of Departments etc. on the subject, "Concessions to civilian employees and others who join military service during the Emergency" (a copy of which is Annexure A-2 on the record of LPA 775/1994) clearly mentions that the Government considered it desirable to issue a consolidated circular embodying all the existing instructions on the subject as also the provision of the Punjab National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965.
The purpose of issuing this compendium of circulars has clearly been mentioned in the opening paragraph thereof, which reads as under :-  "I am directed to invite your attention to Punjab Government Circular No. 7477-4 GS-63/24400 dated the 8th July, 1963 on the subject noted above, and point out that since its issue a number of further instructions have been sent to you.
It has, therefore, been considered desirable to issue a consolidated circular embodying all the existing instructions on the subject as also the provision of the Punjab National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965."
Para 2 of this circular letter defined the expression `Military Service' used in the instructions, meaning as below :-  "--------------- as given in Rule 2 of the Punjab National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965, enrolled or commissioned service in any of three wings of the Indian Armed Forces (including service as a warrant officer) rendered by a person during the period of operation of the Proclamation of Emergency made by the President under Article 352 of the Constitution of India on the 26th October, 1962 or such other service as may hereafter be declared specifically as military service for the purpose of these instructions.
Any period of military training followed by military service shall also be reckoned as military service.
-------"  Serial No. 18 of the compendium of instructions provided for `Special Provision for Engineering and Medical Students' and in the left hand side margin, reference to the Circular No. 3068-4 GSI-64/10933 dated 6th April, 1964 was mentioned.
Towards the end of this Para 18, it was provided that the concessions contained in this paragraph will also apply mutatis-mutandis to medical students of the medical institutions in Punjab.
8.
The writ petitioners (Dr. Hardev Singh and Dr. BS Tuli) have in their writ petitions reproduced the instructions as contained in Para 18 of the compendium of subject, with the subject noted therein.
It may be pointed out that there is no material and substantial difference in the reproduction of the instructions.
Apart from this, there is no room for doubt that these instructions, which were issued in respect of the Engineering students, were applied mutatis mutandis to the Medical students of the Medical Colleges in Punjab and the concessions intended to be given to the Engineering students were decided to be given to the Medical students in the State of Punjab.
The reference is to the circular dated 641964, contained and included in the circular letter dated 2141996.
Be that as it may, the State of Punjab had taken a policy decision to extend the concessions under the aforesaid policy to the medical students of the Medical Colleges of the State of Punjab, at least in 1966, as contained in the circular letter dated 2141966, though reference is made to the earlier circular dated 641966 in Para 18 of the compendium of circular letters.
It is not disputed that the writ petitioners were students of MBBS final year when they applied for getting provisional Short Service Commission and they were selected for the same.
The provisional Short Service Commission was to be replaced by Regular Short Service Commission upon the writ petitioners' successfully completing the MBBS final examination.
It is also not disputed that they successfully completed the final year MBBS examination in January, 1969 and they were seconded to the Regular Short Service Commission w.e.f.
25.4.1969 (as regards Dr. Hardev Singh petitioner) and 151969 (as regards Dr. BS Tuli petitioner).
It is further undisputed that they rendered five years of approved military service and both of them applied for the post of doctors in P.C.M.S.-II and their applications were forwarded by the military authorities.
At that time, they were expecting their release shortly from the army after completion of their Short Service Commission and they were eventually released from the army in April, 1974, Dr. Hardev Singh joined the P.C.M.S.-II on 26274 while the other petitioner-Dr. BS Tuli joined the P.C.M.S.-II on 451974.
9.
The provisions as contained in the army instructions may briefly be noticed as the writ petitioners were seconded to the provisional Short Service Commission/Regular Short Service Commission under these instructions.
A perusal of these instructions will go to show that the provisional Short Service Commissions in the Army Medical Corps were to be granted to final year MBBS students on the terms and conditions as contained in Paras 2, 3 and 4 of the said instructions, the Provisional Short Service Commission was granted, as per instruction contained in Para 5 thereof, which provides as under :-  "Candidates who are selected by the Selection Boards and adjudged physically fit by the Medical Boards will be granted Provisional Short Service Commissions in the rank of 2 Lt.
The date of Provisional Short Service Commission will be on the date on which a candidate is selected by the Selection Board and will be notified by the DGAFMS and also published in the Gazette of India.
Selected candidates will execute bonds as given in the Annexure to this Army Instruction."
Para 6 of the instructions provides for pay and reads as under :-  "The candidates granted Provisional Short Service Commissions will be entitled to a consolidated pay of Rs. 400/- pm No other allowances will be admissible to them, nor will they be provided any services in kind.
They will receive pay upto the last date of the final MBBS examination for which they are due to appear.
Subsequent payments will be withheld till results of the said examination are known.
Those declared successful will be paid arrears of pay from the date it was withheld upto the date of joining military duty.
Those who fail in whole or part of the examination and who qualify in subsequent examinations will not be eligible for such arrears.
Officers who do not appear for their final examination for which they are due will cease to be eligible for pay with effect from the date on which the college authorities declare them ineligible to appear for such an examination or the date on which the examination begins, whichever is earlier."
Para 7 lays down for progress report of such candidates, who were selected for the grant of Provisional Short Service Commission.
Para 8 deals with discipline.
Para 9 deals with the Extension/Termination of Provisional SSC and reads as under :-  "Cases of officers who fail to qualify/appear at the regular MBBS Degree examination following the grant of Provisional SSCs or are unsatisfactorily reported upon, will be disposed of by the DGAFMS on individual merits as below :- a) The Provisional SSC may be continued for a further limited period till they qualify but without pay; or b) The provisional SSC may be terminated.
Action taken under sub-para (b) will be without prejudice to the right of the Government to enforce the liability under the bond executed by the officer vide Para 5 above.
The Provisional SSC to an officer may also be terminated by the DGAFMS or at any time the officer is found medically unfit for Military Service."
Para 10 of the instructions lays down regarding the grant of Short Service Regular Commissions and it reads as under :-  "Immediately after passing the final MBBS examination, officers will be required to obtain a provisional medical registration certificate and forward it to the DGAFMS.
On receipt of these certificates, the DGAFMS will take action to grant Short Service Regular Commissions to these officers under AI 208/59.
They will be called upon to report to a Service establishment by the DGAFMS and will be granted the rank of Lieutenant with effect from the date they report for duty.
The Provisional Short Service Commission will be terminated from the date of the grant of Short Service Regular Commission.
The grant of a Short Service Regular Commission and the relinquishment of Provisional Short Service Commission will be notified in the Gazette of India".
Para 11 lays down that the Short Service Regular Commission will be initially granted for a period of 5 years and extendable thereafter under the terms of AI 208/59.
For all other purposes, these officers will be governed by the provisions of the said Army Instructions.
Para 13 provides as under :-  "The officers granted Provisional Short Services Commissions under this AI will be borne supernumerary to the officers cadre of the AMC until they are granted Short Service Regular Commissions under AI 208/59.
The period of Provisional Short Service Commission will not count towards seniority for pay, promotion and pension on being granted Short Service Regular Commission."
Para 14 has already been referred to above.
10.
The writ petitioners (Dr. Hardev Singh and Dr. BS Tuli) were initially granted provisional Short Service Commission during which they got a fixed pay of Rs. 400/- pm and held the rank of 2nd-Lieutenant but were not authorised to wear uniform and display badge.
After successfully completing the final year course of MBBS examination, they were granted Regular Short Service Commission.
They were, thus, seconded to the military service under the army instructions, referred to above and in accordance with the policy decision of the State of Punjab, as contained in the aforesaid circular-letters.
The State cannot now turn-round and disown its liability to extend the concession of military service to these writ petitioners.
We do not find any valid reasons to hold that despite the fact that the writ petitioners were seconded to earn military service on Provisional/Regular Short Service Commission and having earned the military service for 5 years, they will be deprived of the benefits and concessions given by the State of Punjab to the civilian employees covered by the aforesaid circular letters.
The writ petitioners cannot be differently treated from those students of MBBS final year, who were seconded to the military service during the period of national emergency for the simple reason that instruction No. 14 of the army instructions, under which Provisional/Regular Short Service Commission was granted to the final year students of the medical colleges, stood amended and the instructions were applicable not only during the period of national emergency, but thereafter upto the extended period, i.e. 31.12.1969.
11.
Learned counsel for the appellants, Dr. Sudesh Gulati and Dr. Satish Kumar Verma, placed reliance on the judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Dhan Singh and others v. State of Haryana and others, JT 1990(4) SC 735, wherein the validity of the amendments made by the Government of Haryana in the Punjab Government National Emergency (Concessions) Rules, 1965 was challenged.
The appellants before the Apex Court were ex-servicemen in the State of Haryana.
They had served the Indian army during the period of national emergency declared by the President of India on 26101962 under Article 352 of the Constitution of India and lifted on 1011968.
These rules provided for certain benefits to ex-army personnel, who were re-employed, relating to the matters of increments, seniority and pension etc.
The Emergency Concessions Rules aforesaid were adopted by the State of Haryana, which effected amendments vide notifications dated 2231976, 981976 and 5111976.
By these amendments, the appellants before the Apex Court were denied benefits under the rules.
Rule 4 read with Rule 2, as amended, provided benefits only to those enrolled or commissioned service in any of the three wings of the Armed forces during the period of national emergency and not to those who joined the military service before the imposition of emergency, i.e. before 26101962.
The appellants contended that they were discriminated and the amendments were violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
While repelling the contention of the appellants, the Apex Court held :-  "The young persons who have joined the military service during the national emergency and those who were already in service and due to exigencies of service had been compelled to serve during the emergency form two distinct classes.
The appellants and the petitioners who joined the army before the proclamation of emergency, had chosen the career voluntarily and their service during emergency was as a matter of course.
They had no option or intention of joining the government's service during the period of emergency as they were already serving in the army.
The persons who enrolled or commissioned during the emergency, on the other hand, had on account of the call of the nation joined the army at that critical juncture of national emergency to save the motherland by taking a greater risk where danger to the life of a member of the armed forces was higher.
They include persons who could have pursued their studies, acquired higher qualifications and joined a higher post and those who could have joined the government service before attaining the maximum age prescribed and thereby gained seniority in the service.
Foregoing all these benefits and avenues, they joined the army keeping in view the needs of the country and assurances contained in the conditions of service in executive instructions.
The latter form a class by themselves and they cannot be equated to those who joined the army before the proclamation of the emergency.
Benefits had been promised to such persons who heeded to the call of the nation at that critical juncture.
Older man by joining the military service lost chance of joining other government service and when he joins such service on release from the army, younger man had already occupied the post.
To remove the hardship, the benefit of military service was sought to be given to those young persons who were enrolled/commissioned during the period of emergency foregoing their job opportunities.
The differentia is, therefore, intelligible and has a direct nexus to the objects sought to be achieved.
The petitioners cannot, therefore, challenge the rule as discriminatory or arbitrary.
Such of those appellants and the petitioners who have joined the army before the proclamation of the emergency are not, therefore, entitled to the benefit of military service as per the Emergency Concessions Rules."
11.
The case of Dhan Singh (supra) was sought to be reviewed in the case of Hav.
Bharat Singh etc. v. State of Haryana and another etc., AIR 1966 SC 1705.
The Apex Court declined to reconsider the case of Dhan Singh (supra) and held as under :-  "The Rules offered benefits to those who joined State Government service after having seen military service during the Emergency.
It was open to the State to withdraw the offer, but not qua those who had already accepted the offer and joined the State Government service.
Hence was rendered the decision in KC Arora's case (AIR 1987 SC 1858).
The State Government did not withdraw the offer wholly but restricted it to those who had enrolled or were commissioned in the armed forces during the Emergency.
The State Government was entitled to do so.
In our view, there is a clear and intelligible difference between those who had already chosen the armed forces as a career when the Emergency was declared and those who, in response to the nation's call joined the armed forces after the Emergency was declared.
It was in the country's interest at that critical juncture to make service in the armed forces attractive and compensate those who would otherwise have chosen other vocations.
The grant of benefits to the latter class while denying them to the former class is in no way arbitrary or discriminatory.
The Rules did not confer an indefeasible right on all persons who had served in the armed forces during the Emergency.
Only those of them who had joined the State Government's service while the unamended Rules operated acquired a vested right, by reason of their having accepted the offer made thereby, which could not be defeated by the amendment."
12.
The facts in the instant case are clearly distinguishable from the case of Dhan Singh (supra).
In the instant case, the writ petitioners are claiming benefit of military service at par with those persons, who had served the military during the period of national emergency as the Army Instructions aforesaid stood amended and the amendment would be deemed to have been issued from the date of lifting of the emergency and these instructions were in force when the petitioners were seconded to military service.
We have already referred to the case of the writ petitioners that they claim benefit under the circular issued by the State of Punjab, giving certain concessions to those civilian employees, who were seconded to the military service.
The learned counsel for the writ petitioners (Dr. Hardev Singh and Dr. BS Tuli) drew our attention to Annexure P-8, i.e. copy of the Punjab Government Circular Letter No. 5756-SII(3)-70 dated 5101970, issued by the Chief Secretary to Government Punjab to all the Heads of Departments etc. on the subject, "Demobilised Army Personnel - Concessions when recruited against unreserved vacancies."
The contents of this annexure may be noticed as under :-  "I am directed to address you on the subject noted above and to say that the various concessions granted under the Demobilised Indian Armed Force Personnel (Reservation of Vacancies in the Punjab State Non-Technical Services, Medical and Engineering Services, and PCS (Judicial Branch) Rules notified on 17th June, 1968, 19th September, 1968 and 15th September, 1969, respectively are admissible only when the persons concerned are selected against the reserved vacancies.
In this connection, it is clarified that in order to remain within the scope of the relevant Rules, referred to above, the concessions in question cannot be extended against unreserved vacancies.
But where a released Army Personnel has qualified against a non-reserved vacancy has been appointed against a general unreserved vacancies in the first instance he should be given an option (only at the time of first appointment) to accept a reserved vacancy even if it occurs subsequent to his appointment.
This will automatically give the benefit of concessions like seniority etc. in the manner specified in the Rules ibid."
Annexure P16 is letter dated 131977 issued by the Director, Health and Family Welfare, Punjab to petitioner No. 1/Dr.
Hardev Singh regarding grant of Army Service benefit towards civil service.
A perusal of this annexure will go to show that the petitioner/Dr.
Hardev Singh was requested to give his option to accept the reserved vacancy for ex-army officers even if it occurred subsequent to his appointment for the purpose of army service benefit, so that his case for grant of army service benefit towards civil service be examined.
The learned counsel for the writ petitioners further referred to the letter Annexure P7, written by Dr. Hardev Singh/petitioner No. 1, to the Director, Health and Family Welfare, Punjab, giving his option to accept the reserved vacancy.
The grievance of the writ petitioner/respondents is that despite the said offer having been made and his accepting the same, the case of Dr. Hardev Singh was not considered by the State Government.
On the other hand, the State has taken a counter stand in the written statement.
A perusal of letter Annexure P-16 and the reply of Dr. Hardev Singh/petitioner Annexure P17 thereto leaves no room for doubt that the State Government had taken a policy decision of providing benefit of military service by offering the reserved vacancy, though occurring subsequently, to such candidates, who had been selected against general and open vacancies, though they had served the army.
We find considerable force in the argument of learned counsel for the writ petitioners.
13.
The next contention of learned counsel for the writ petitioner/respondents was that they were being discriminated inasmuch as similarly situated doctors, who had been granted Short Service Commission under the policy decision of the State Government and the policy instructions referred to above, well after the expiry of the national emergency were granted the benefit of the military service.
The State in Para 9 of the written statement admitted about the benefit of military service being granted to Dr. Sukhpal Kaur, Dental Assistant Surgeon and Dr. Avtar Singh.
The State, however, took the stand that the Demobilised Service Rules were applicable to those who were commissioned to army or who had joined the Armed Forces of the Union on or after 1111962 but before 1011968.
A perusal of Annexure P3 will go to show that Dr. Sukhpal Kaur was allowed benefit of military services for five years ie from 30.4.87 to 29.4.92, towards seniority and pay etc. under Rules 5(1) and 6 of the Demobilised Service Rules, as amended from time to time.
The writ petitioners/respondents have also rendered military service, having been seconded to firstly on Provisional Short Service Commission and later on on Regular Short Service Commission, after the lifting of the national emergency, i.e. after 1011968.
The State has not furnished any explanation, much less the valid and reasonable for extending the benefit of military service to Dr. Sukhpal Kaur and denying the same to the writ petitioners/respondents (Dr. Hardev Singh and Dr. BS Tuli).
The action of the respondent-State is, thus, discriminatory and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
14.
In view of the foregoing discussion, we are of the view that the writ petitioners/respondents were entitled to claim benefit of the military service rendered by them on Regular Short Service Commission from 1969 to 1974.
We, however, find that the learned Single Judge has issued a direction to the State for treating the petitioners as State Government employees w.e.f.
11.12.1968 for entitlement of all the benefits, which flowed therefrom.
This date (11.12.1968) appears to have been taken on the basis of contents of Annexure P7, which has been treated as in the nature of letter of appointment of the petitioners.
The finding of learned Single Judge is not even in accordance with the averments made in the writ petition.
The writ petitioners themselves have sought the benefit of military service for the period w.e.f.
25.4.1969 (in respect of petitioner No. 1) and 151969 (in respect of petitioner No. 2) till April, 1974 when they were finally released from the army.
In Para 6 of the writ petition, it has been categorically averred, "----- the petitioners rendered 5 years of approved military service during 1969 to 1974 ----."
Even Para 13 of the army instructions, No. 9/S, New Delhi dated May 21, 1963 (which has been quoted above), will go to show that the period of Provisional Short Service Commission will not count towards seniority for pay, promotion and pension on being granted Short Service Regular Commission.
The petitioners were granted provisional Short Service Commission w.e.f.
11.12.1968.
They are obviously not entitled to the said benefit for the period w.e.f.
11.12.1968 till 25.4.1969 (regarding petitioner No. 1) and 151969 (regarding petitioner No. 2) when they were finally seconded to Regular Short Service Commission.
A perusal of Annexure P7 will go to show that the Principal, Government Medical College, Patiala, sent intimation to the Director, Health Services, Punjab vide memo No. MC-9(104)II-70/23649 dated 14970 regarding the students who were seconded to Army during National Emergency.
The date of joining the army is not mentioned in this annexure.
However, the date of granting of Short Service Commission was intimated.
The names of both the petitioners have been shown at serial Nos. 18 and 19 of the list, as Dr. Hardev Singh Samarao and Dr. Balbir Singh Tuli.
The date of grant of Short Service Commission against their names is shown as 11.12.1968.
This letter (Annexure P7) is, thus, not a letter of appointment and it appears that under some misapprehension, it has been described as letter of appointment.
15.
The learned Single Judge has, in our considered view, rightly allowed the benefit of the military service rendered by the writ petitioners/respondents (Dr. Hardev Singh and Dr. BS Tuli) towards pay, seniority etc., but the date of grant of benefits of military service deserves to be corrected and the period of military service rendered by them is to be taken from 1969 till April, 1974.
We do not find any merit in the two appeals.
Subject to the modification in the period of the military service rendered by the petitioners No. 1 and 2 (i.e. Dr. Hardev Singh and Dr. BS Tuli) from 25.4.1969 and 151969 respectively till April 1974, the appeals being devoid of merit are dismissed.
No costs.
Appeals dismissed.