GR Bhattacharjee, J - In this writ petition the petitioner, who is a Conductor employed under the respondent/Calcutta State Transport Corporation, has challenged the charge-sheet dated 271987 issued to him by the departmental authorities for taking departmental action against him in respect of four specific items of charges as mentioned in the charge-sheet.
By order dated 2481987 a learned Judge of this court passed an interim order in this matter directing that the departmental enquiry would continue and the final order also might be passed, but the same would not be communicated to the petitioner without the leave of the court.
The learned Advocate for the respondent/CSTC submits that following the procedure prescribed by law the departmental authorities have already concluded the enquiry and have passed an order stopping two increments of the petitioner with cumulative effect and they now seek the leave of the court to communicate the said order to the petitioner.
As I have already pointed out, the charge-sheet which has been challenged in this proceeding contains four heads of charges.
The allegation in the charge-sheet is that on 1131987 in the first shift the petitioner was allotted duty in a particular vehicle of a particular route and in course of checking the passengers alighting from the bus it was found that the petitioner, bus conductor, had kept unbooked a group of two passengers travelling from Salt Lake and the checking staff realised Rs. 120 as fare at the rate of 60 paise each from them and got them booked by the petitioner and further that the petitioner issued two tickets of 60 paise each bearing the numbers specified in the charge-sheet but punched them on the wrong side.
It is the further allegation in the charge-sheet that the petitioner's cash bag was checked at Esplanade Headquarter and a deficit of Rs. 2150 was found in it and thereafter on a search of the petitioner's person, a five rupee currency note was recovered from inside the left upper pocket of the petitioner and the currency note was seized as a concealed money.
On the basis of the aforesaid fact, as alleged, charge was framed in the charge-sheet against the petitioner under the following four heads :  (i) keeping unbooked a group of two passengers of 60 paise fare each; (ii) issuing two wrong punched tickets of 60 paise each after realisation of the fares from the passengers; (iii) having a deficit of Rs. 2150 paise in his cash-bag; (iv) keeping in his possession a concealed money of Rs. 5/- and all those constituting gross misconduct.
The petitioner was directed to submit a written explanation within seven days of the receipt of the charge-sheet showing adequate cause, why he should not be punished, in the manner prescribed in Regulation 36 of the Calcutta State Transport Corporation Employees Service Regulation and he was also further directed to state whether he desired to be heard in person.
He was directed to deposit his identity card and metal badge on receipt of the charge-sheet.
He was placed under suspension with subsistence grant.
2.
After hearing the learned Advocate for the petitioner and the learned Advocate for the respondent and also considering the matter in its due perspective I find no reason why it should be held that the charge-sheet itself is bad.
As we have seen the charge-sheet gives the factual background and also the specific counts of charges on which the petitioner has been asked to submit his explanation.
A plain reading of the charge-sheet would show that the charges are specific and clear without containing any ambiguity or vagueness in the same.
The question whether the charges are true or false is entirely outside the purview of consideration of this Court in deciding the question whether the charge-sheet is prima facie bad.
The question whether the charges are factually true or not will be decided in the proceeding itself by the appropriate authority and it is not for this court at this stage to decide whether the charges are factually correct or not.
3.
In the `demand justice' notice the petitioner inter alia says that the allegation made by the checking staff is false and the charge No. (i) is thus unfounded.
The question whether the charge No. (i) is factually false or is unfounded has to be decided not by this court at this stage but by the enquiry authority in the enquiry proceeding.
As regards the charge No. (ii) it is stated in the `demand justice' notice that punching of tickets is done by tearing them on one side of them and while tearing the tickets these might have been torn by the petitioner on the wrong side inadvertently.
It is further stated by the petitioner in the said `demand justice' notice that this is a (too) trivial irregularity to be treated as an offence to frame the charge No. (ii) against him.
So, seemingly the irregularity was there and the petitioner says that this is a trivial irregularity.
The question whether this is a trivial irregularity or not is also to be considered and decided at the first instance in the disciplinary proceeding itself, and, therefore, it cannot be said that the said charge is bad prima facie.
As regards the third charge of having a deficit in the cash bag, that is also a question of fact.
It is, however, submitted that subsequently the petitioner deposited the deficit amount with the authority concerned.
In that connection the learned Advocate for the petitioner also attracts my attention to Annexure D to the writ petition.
On the basis of that it is submitted by him that deposit of the deficit amount will absolve the petitioner from liability.
Well, even if it is so, the fact that there was initial deficit, remains there and the question whether the subsequent deposit absolves him also is a plea which he can take in reply to the charge-sheet itself.
That apart the fact that he is absolved of the charge No. (iii) because of the subsequent deposit of the deficit amount does not make the entire charge itself bad.
As regards the fourth charge it is stated in the `demand justice' notice by the petitioner that immediately after he made over his cash tickets etc. to the checking staff for the purpose of cash bag checking he discovered that a five-rupee note remained in the pocket of his uniform and he himself made over the said five rupee note to the checking staff in no time and the charge of concealment of the said amount is thus frivolous and misconceived.
The question whether he deliberately concealed that or whether it happened inadvertently are also not matters for this court to decide and it is for the disciplinary authority at the first instance to decide the same in dealing with the charges framed against the petitioner.
On a total consideration of all relevant aspects I thus find that there is no reason for which it can be said that the charge-sheet itself is bad.
Even assuming that in any particular case the charge-sheeted employee has very good defence in respect of each item of charge-sheet, that does not make the charge-sheet bad prima facie so as to invite the court to quash the charges by deciding the merit of his defence.
The validity of the charge-sheet will have to be decided on the basis of the charge-sheet itself and not on the basis of the defence which might be available to the charge-sheeted employee.
Judged by that standard I do not find from the charges, as already recorded, that this court can hold that the charge-sheet is prima facie bad and deserves to be quashed.
4.
It is submitted on behalf of the petitioner that in the charge-sheet the petitioner was asked to deposit his identity card and metal badge.
I do not find anything wrong in it.
The petitioner was put under suspension and, therefore, there is nothing wrong if he had been asked to deposit the identity card and metal badge which were supplied to him by the respondents.
Moreover, these things have nothing to do with the question of validity of the charge- sheet.
5.
It has been submitted that in the charge-sheet the petitioner has been asked to show cause as to why he should not be punished and this, according to the learned Advocate for the petitioner, shows a closed mind of the departmental authorities and they have decided to punish the petitioner and, accordingly, the charge-sheet should be held bad for that reason also.
I, however, do not subscribe to this view.
The petitioner has been asked in the factual background stated to him, to submit a written explanation and show cause as to why he should not be punished in the manner prescribed in regulation 36 of the Calcutta State Transport Corporation Employees Service Regulations.
Since the service regulations have been expressly referred to in that connection, it would show clearly that the departmental authorities wanted to proceed following the procedure prescribed in the service regulations and that is why the petitioner was also asked to submit an explanation and show cause and was also asked to state whether he desired to be heard in person.
This clearly shows that the departmental authorities were fully conscious of the procedural requirements and were also inclined to give the petitioner also opportunity to place his case in accordance with the rules and regulations before any final decision in the matter is taken.
A plain reading of the charge-sheet as a whole will clearly indicate that whatever has been stated there has been stated only in a tentative way giving the petitioner full opportunity in accordance with the prescribed procedure to place his case and meet the charge.
In the circumstances, I do not find any reason to hold that the charge-sheet is bad for any reason whatsoever.
Since I find no fault with the charge-sheet prima facie, whatever may be the merit of the charge, I dismiss the writ application without, however, entering into the merit of the charges which remains open to be decided by the appropriate authority.
The interim order also stands vacated.
Petition dismissed.