THB Chalapathi, J - The petitioners 1 and 2 were working as Joint Director Agriculture in Agriculture Department while the 3rd petitioner was working as Deputy Director Agriculture while petitioners 4 and 5 were working as Project Officers in the Department of Agriculture.
The 2nd respondent was also working as Joint Director Agriculture in the Agriculture Department.
On 1.3.1979 a tentative seniority list of Punjab Agricultural Service (Class I) Officers was published.
In the said list the 2nd respondent was shown as junior to the petitioners.
The 2nd respondent belongs to Scheduled Castes.
When two vacancies in the post of Joint Directors arose one Sukhdev Singh and the 2nd respondent were promoted on the ground that two posts out of seven posts were reserved for the members of the Scheduled Castes.
According to the petitioners, the Government reserved only 14% vacancies to be filled up by the members of the Scheduled Castes.
Filling up of two vacancies by the members of the Scheduled Castes far exceeded the percentage of reservation.
The petitioners also averred that in civil writ petition 3882 of 1981 this Court held by its judgment dated 25.5.1982 that for working out the percentage the promotees/appointees in the cadre - whether on the basis of reservation or otherwise - have to be taken notice of and that any promotions of the members of the Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes made beyond the prescribed limit on the basis of instructions of the Government are void and non est .
Accordingly, this Court directed the authorities to consider the case of the petitioner in that case for promotion in the light of the observations made by their Lordships.
The Government also clarified this position in their letter dated 27.7.1982 that the reservation for members of the Scheduled Castes is to be made on the basis of overall cadre strength of the posts and not on the basis of points reserved in the roster.
The petitioners submitted a representation dated 981982 praying to treat the post of Joint Director of Agriculture against which the 2nd respondent is working as unreserved and fill the same by considering the claims of the persons belonging to non-Scheduled Castes but the authorities did not take any action on the said representation.
Therefore, the petitioners who are seniors to the 2nd respondent filed this writ petition to consider their cases for promotion to the post of Joint Director in place of the second respondent.
2.
The 2nd respondent filed a written statement that his promotion was challenged in civil writ petition No. 260 of 1979 by one Jagjit Singh and that the said writ petition was dismissed and the judgment in CWP 3882 of 1981 was subject matter of Special Leave Petition filed in Supreme Court of India.
He, however, admitted that a seniority list was issued in the year 1979 and according to that seniority list he was junior to the petitioners but he has been promoted as Joint Director in the year 1979.
He belongs to Scheduled Castes category and, therefore, the writ petition is liable to be dismissed.
3.
There is no dispute that seven posts of Joint Directors were available at the time when the 2nd respondent was promoted.
It is also undisputed that 14% of the vacancies were reserved to the Scheduled Castes.
Therefore, only one vacancy was available to the Scheduled Castes candidate.
It is also not in dispute that Sukhdev Singh who was junior to the 2nd respondent and who also belongs to Scheduled Castes was promoted.
Therefore, the promotion of the 2nd respondent was in excess of the quota reserved for Scheduled Castes.
I need not to go into the several contentions raised on behalf of the parties in view of the latest decision of the Supreme Court in Ajit Singh Januja and others v. State of Punjab and others, AIR 1996 Supreme Court 1189 : 1996(2) SCT 278 (SC) wherein considering various authorities their Lordships of Supreme Court held as follows :-  ``We respectfully concur with the view in Union of India v. Virpal singh Chauhan, JT 1995(7) SC 231 : 1995(4) SCT 695 (SC), (supra) that seniority between the reserved category candidates and general candidates in the promoted category shall continue to be governed by their panel position i.e. with reference to their inter se seniority in the lower grade.
The rule of reservation gives accelerated promotion, but it does not give the accelerated `consequential seniority.'
If a Scheduled Caste/Schedule Tribe candidate is promoted earlier because of the rule of reservation/roster and his senior belonging to the general category candidate is promoted later to that higher grade the general category candidate shall regain his seniority over such earlier promoted scheduled caste/tribe candidate.
As already pointed out above that when a scheduled caste/tribe candidate is promoted earlier by applying the rule of reservation/roster against a post reserved for such scheduled caste/tribe T 278 (SC) candidate, in this process he does not supersede his seniors belonging to the general category.
In this process there was no occasion to examine the merit of such scheduled caste/tribe candidate vis-a-vis his seniors belonging to the general category.
As such it will be only rational, just and proper to hold that when the general category candidate is promoted later from the lower grade to the higher grade, he will be considered senior to a candidate belonging to the scheduled caste/tribe who had been given accelerated promotion against the post reserved for him.
Whenever a question arises for filling up a post reserved for scheduled caste/tribe candidate in still higher grade then such candidate belonging to scheduled caste/tribe shall be promoted first but when the consideration is in respect of promotion against the general category post in still higher grade then the general category candidate who has been promoted later shall be considered senior and his case shall be considered first for promotion applying either principle of seniority-cum-merit or merit-cum- seniority.
If this rule and procedure is not applied then result will be that majority of the posts in the higher grade shall be held at one stage by persons who have not only entered in service on basis of reservation and roster but have excluded the general category candidates from being promoted to the posts reserved for general category candidates merely on the ground to their initial accelerated promotions.
This will not be consistent with the requirement or the spirit of Article 16(4) or Article 335 of the Constitution.''
The Supreme Court further directed the State Government to consider the case of the appellants and others similarly situated in the light of the said judgment.
In the circumstances of the case, I am also of the opinion that the same direction can be given in this writ petition.
If any of the petitioners are retired from service by now they can be given paper promotion and the monetary benefits be paid to them on the basis of notional promotion.
4.
With the above observations, the writ petition is disposed of.
Order accordingly.