THB Chalapathi, J - Challenging the award of the Labour Court dated 13111981 in Reference No. 826 of 1980 this writ petition has been filed.
2.
The petitioner was employed as a Peon in the 1st respondent-company for a period of 13 years.
His services were terminated on 2031980.
The petitioner raised an industrial dispute which was referred to the Labour Court for adjudication.
The Labour Court in the impugned award found that the termination of services of the petitioner was illegal, but the Labour Court did not give the relief of reinstatement and back wages to the petitioner.
A reading of the award passed by the Labour Court shows that it has not considered the matter in a judicious manner.
The relevant portion of the award reads as follows :  "The workman was employed as a Peon.
He could not give the details of his expenditure.
It is not clear as to what efforts were made by him to get employment elsewhere and he did not get his name registered with the Employment Exchange.
In case of reinstatement, there will be further industrial dispute and there will be no harmony between the employer and the employee."
3.
This is hardly a reason declining the relief of reinstatement and back wages when the Labour Court came to the conclusion that the termination of the petitioner was illegal.
It is for the Management to allege and prove that the workman was gainfully employed when he was out of service.
It is not for the workman to get his name registered with Employment Exchange.
It cannot be said that in every case of reinstatement, there will be further industrial dispute.
Because of the disputes between the workmen and the Managements, the Labour Courts are established to decide and adjudicate those disputes.
It is not clear from the award whether the Management has pleaded that the petitioner was gainfully employed and, therefore, he was not entitled to the relief of reinstatement and back wages.
The Presiding Officer of the Labour Court dealt with the matter in a very cursory way.
I am, therefore, of the opinion that the award of the Labour Court declining the relief of reinstatement and back wages to the petitioner is liable to be set aside.
4.
I, therefore, allow this writ petition and direct the Ist respondent to reinstate the petitioner into service.
Though the writ petition was filed on 22111982, but the petitioner has not taken any stop to get the writ petition disposed of at an early date.
It cannot be imagined that the petitioner has not been doing anything for the last 15 years.
I think that the interest of justice will be met if the back wages are ordered to be paid from the date of termination i.e. 2031980 till the date of filing of the writ petition i.e. 22111982.
5.
The writ petition is allowed in the above terms.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.