H S Bedi, J. (Oral) - This is plaintiff's second appeal.
The plaintiff-appellant Bawa Ram a constable with the Punjab Police was posted in Amritsar during the year 1975.
A departmental inquiry was held against him for absence from duty on various occasions during the year 1975.
As a result whereof, vide order dated 10th May, 1976 he was dismissed from service.
The appellant thereafter filed a civil suit impugning the aforesaid order on various grounds.
It was pleaded that the order aforesaid could not be sustained as the inquiry conducted against him was not according to the provisions of Rule 1624 of the Punjab Police Rules (hereinafter referred to as the `rules') as the summary of allegations and the list of witnesses had not been supplied by the Department and further that no show cause notice had been given to him by the punishing authority before passing the impugned order.
The trial court came to a conclusion on an examination of Exhibit P-1, the inquiry file, that the list of witnesses as also the summary of allegations had been supplied to the appellant on 19th January, 1976 and in token of having received these documents he had signed a proper receipt.
The trial court observed that the admission of Shivraj Singh, inquiry officer, made in his cross-examination that the aforesaid document had not been supplied to the plaintiff was therefore a mere slip on account of confusion.
On the second plea raised by the appellant i.e. with regard to the non- issuance of a show cause notice, the trial Court observed that the show cause notice dated 30th March, 1976 had been issued to the appellant and that a reply thereto had also been filed by him and these documents had been taken into account by the punishing authority while making the impugned order.
Aggrieved thereby the second appeal has been filed in this Court.
2.
I have gone through the judgment of the courts below and find that no ground for interference is made out.
The only two points raised before the Addl.
District Judge, Amritsar, the first appellate court, were that the list of documents had not been supplied to the plaintiff with the result that the inquiry was vitiated.
Reliance was once again placed on the cross-examination of Shivraj Singh, DW2 the inquiry officer.
The appellate court found that Rule 1624 of the Rules did not contemplate the preparation or supply of any such list.
To my mind the appellate court has recorded a finding of fact after going into the entire matter which is borne out by the file Ex. P1 that such a list of witnesses as well as the list of documents had in fact supplied to the appellant on 19th January, 1976.
Moreover, it is to be noted that the appellant had admitted his mis-conduct before the inquiry officer although he had pleaded extenuating circumstances.
No prejudice, therefore, if at all can flow to the appellant on this account as well.
3.
The second point urged before the appellate Court was that the appellant had not been produced before the punishing authority as was required by sub-rule (ix) of Rule 1624(1) of the rules.
To my mind, this argument is also untenable.
The relevant entry at page 91 of the inquiry file reveals that a show cause notice was issued on 30th March, 1976 and a reply thereto had also been filed by the appellant on 9th April, 1976.
In the light of the decision of this Court in State of Punjab v. Parkash Chand, 1992(1) SCT 123(P&H), this amounts to substantial compliance with the provisions of sub- rule (ix) of Rules 1624(1) of the Rules.
In this case it was observed "We, therefore, hold that the issuance of a written show cause notice to the delinquent official and the consideration of the reply received in pursuance thereto, amounted to substantial compliance with sub-rule (ix) of Rule 1624(1) of the Rules and the said exercise having gone through in the present case, fulfils the requirement of law.
We are, however, not unmindful of the fact that written representations are often dealt with in a casual and perfunctory manner and to obviate this possibility we hold that should a delinquent official requests for a personal hearing, it must be given to him and its denial would vitiate any action against the official".
No other point was argued.
There is accordingly no merit in the appeal and the same stands dismissed.