VK Bali, J - This order shall dispose of two connected writ petitions bearing Nos. 4228 and 3455 of 1981 as common questions of law and fact are involved therein.
The facts have, however, been extracted from CWP No. 3455 of 1981 as arguments were addressed on the pleadings made in this writ.
2.
Mr. BL Goyal and five others, all officiating as Superintending Engineers with Haryana Public Works Department, Building and Roads Branch, through present petition filed by them under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, seek issuance of writ in the nature of certiorari so as to quash order dated July 14, 1981 (Annexure P-7) vide which their seniority was altered in Class II service as also the subsequent notification dated April 29, 1987 (Annexure P-17/A) vide which respondent No. 4-C.L.
Garg was given deemed date of promotion in HSE Class I as also order dated December 15, 1987 (Annexure P-23) allowing selection grade as Executive Engineer as also order dated October, 1989 (Annexure P-25) giving retrospective promotion as Superintending Engineer along with all consequential benefits.
The petitioners also seek writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondent-State to make further promotions on the basis of Class I seniority as circulated vide government notification dated October 1, 1973.
3.
The facts giving rise to this writ for the reliefs, as fully detailed above, reveal that the petitioners are regular employees of the Haryana State and are working as Superintending Engineers.
They appeared and passed B.Sc.
(Civil) Examination as tabulated below :-  "Description Date of final examination Date of declaration of resulting/passing final examination University.
Petitioners 1 and 2 April, 1963 June 27, 1963 Panjab University.
Petitioner No. 3 April, 1964 June 18, 1964 Punjabi University Petitioner No. 4 October, 1963 January 2, 1964 Panjab University Petitioner No. 5 and 6 April and May 1964 July 2, 1964 Panjab University Insofar as respondents 3 and 4 are concerned, they passed their B.Sc.
Engineering (Civil) Examination held by the Panjab University, Chandigarh on July 2, 1964.
All the petitioners appeared before the Punjab Public Service Commission (for short PPSC) for competitive test/interview for the post of Temporary Assistant Engineer in Building and Roads department at the first opportunity available to them after passing the qualifying examination.
Whereas petitioners 1 and 2 appeared for interview/competitive test held by the PPSC during October, 1963, petitioners 3 to 6 appeared for the competitive test/interview during October, 1964.
On the basis of their selection by the PPSC, petitioners 1 and 2 were offered the post of temporary Assistant Engineers in the Public Works Department, Punjab (B&R) Branch vide letter dated May 2, 1964.
Petitioners 3 to 6 were offered the post of temporary Assistant Engineers vide letter dated December 5, 1964.
It is the case of the petitioners that while determining the seniority amongst the direct recruits, merit determined by the PPSC was the criteria, and as such petitioners 1 and 2 were assigned seniority by the Government on the basis of merit determined by the PPSC.
In the same way, petitioners 3 to 6 were assigned seniority on the basis of recommendations made by the Commission in order of merit.
Petitioner No. 3 had applied for the post of merit temporary Assistant Engineer in Punjab Public Health Branch as well as Buildings and Roads branch and was selected by the PPSC in both the branches.
He was, however, offered a post of temporary Assistant Engineer in the Punjab Public Health Branch vide letter dated November 13, 1964.
On receipt of acceptance by the petitioner, the Chief Engineer, Public Health Branch, issued his posting orders vide letter dated November 17, 1964.
Vide this order, training of the said petitioner was waived off and he was given the charge of a Sub Division straightaway.
Petitioner No. 3 thus joined his posting in Public Health Branch on November 21, 1964.
He, however, vide letter dated January 7, 1965 requested the Secretary to Government of Punjab, PWD, B&R/Public Health branch for transfer of his service from Public Health branch to Building and Roads branch.
The Chief Engineer, vide order dated June 4, 1965 relieved the petitioner on his transfer to Building and Roads branch where he joined on June 30, 1965.
On Feburary 19, 1965 the Punjab Service of Engineers Class II Public Works Department (Building and Roads Branch) Rules, 1965 (hereinafter referred to as Class II rules) came into existence.
Rule 3 of the Class II service rules provides that the service shall be constituted at the commencement of the rules and since thereafter in the manner laid down in appendix `G' read with Rule 9 of the said Rules.
According to the procedure prescribed in Appendix `G' to Class II service rules, the petitioners were considered by the Screening Committee under clause 1(d) of the Appendix `G' read with Rule 9 for appointment to Class II service in the year 1966 and all of them were found suitable for appointment to Class II service by the Screening Committee and the recommendations of the Screening Committee were approved by the PPSC as well.
Consequently, notification dated October 29, 1966 was issued assigning all the petitioners along with others as members of Class II service w.e.f.
Feburary 19-20, 1965.
Respondents 3 and 4, after passing their final year of B.Sc.
Engineering (Civil) examination in July 1964 joined military service.
They were granted short service regular commission on probation w.e.f.
Feburary 14, 1965.
On release from military, they were appointed as temporary Assistant Engineers (under training) in the Haryana Public Works Department (B&R) Branch on Feburary 14, 1970 and May 13, 1970 respectively.
The Government issued an offer of appointment to respondent No. 3 for the post of temporary Assistant Engineer without any selection from the Haryana Public Service Commission.
Respondents 3 and 4 were given deemed date of appointment as temporary Assistant Engineers as May 20, 1964.
A gradation list of HSE Class I, HSE Class II and other gazetted officers was published almost every year.
For the first time in the gradation list published by the Haryana Government corrected upto July 1, 1973 respondents 3 and 4 were shown at higher place than the petitioners, even though it was mentioned in the remarks column that their seniority position is provisional.
On receipt of this gradation list, some of the petitioners immediately objected to this change and represented to the State for intimating the grounds on which the change was effected.
They received letter dated March 22, 1974 and were informed that allocation of respondents 3 and 4 to the State of Haryana was provisional and their seniority cannot be taken till allocation is finalised.
In the letter aforesaid petitioners were given to understand that they would be informed and given adequate opportunity after finalising the case of allocation of respondents 3 and 4 and before deciding their case of seniority.
However, one of the petitioners once again reminded the Government vide letter dated July 13, 1981 and requested that it may be intimated if the allocation of respondents 3 and 4 had been finalised.
It was also prayed that if the Government still contemplated to place respondents 3 and 4 over and above the petitioners in Class II service, petitioners should be given reasonable and adequate opportunity before any final action was taken.
Vide memo dated October 7, 1976 the Chief Engineer, Haryana PWD, B&R branch circulated to all concerned a list giving integrated seniority of Sub Divisional Engineers (Civil) and invited objections against the position of seniority shown in the list by anyone adversely affected.
Respondents 3 and 4 were shown at Sr. Nos. 82 and 83 in the said list.
However, the list did not contain the names of petitioners.
Vide letter dated July 14, 1981 the Government fixed the seniority of respondents 3 and 4 in Class II service above the petitioners without disclosing any reasons and without finalising their case of allocation and, as per the case of the petitioners, without giving them opportunity of hearing.
Constrained, petitioners once again filed representations against the seniority list issued on October 12, 1981 but, it is the case of the petitioners, the same were never decided.
An integrated seniority list of Class II officers was again circulated vide letter dated January 17, 1984.
Petitioners once again submitted their objections but no decision has been conveyed to them till date.
Seniority list of Class II officers was circulated vide letters dated Feburary 8, 1985, October 3, 1985 and December 5, 1985 as well.
While issuing these seniority lists as well, objections were invited.
However, since these seniority lists did not make any change as regards tentative seniority position of the petitioners and respondents, the petitioners again requested in Feburary, 1985, to decide the objections raised by them but to no avail.
It is pleaded that these lists had been prepared in order to give army service benefits to some of the officers with diploma qualifications, who joined through the Haryana Public Service Commission during 1969-71.
It is further the case of petitioners that respondents 3 and 4 approached the respondent-State to claim seniority over and above the petitioners and the request, even though earlier declined, was later accepted.
However, the petitioners were not made even aware of any such representation nor the contents thereof.
4.
Mr. Gopal Mahajan, learned counsel for the petitioners, on the strength of the facts, as have been fully detailed above, contends that the respondent-State after having rejected the representation of respondents 3 and 4, could not accept the same and that too without giving any notice and affording an opportunity of hearing to the petitioners.
He further contends that seniority inter-se petitioners and respondents 3 and 4 had to be determined in view of the provisions contained in the Class II service rules and letter dated July 17, 1964 could not be the determining factor for determining inter-se seniority.
Even if letter aforesaid was to be taken into consideration, in the said letter, criteria determining the date of appointment as temporary Assistant Engineer was from the date of passing the final year of examination or the date from which emergency commission was granted, whichever is later.
Respondents 3 and 4 passed the final year examination on July 2, 1964, i.e. the date of publication of result in the University Gazette notification and the date of grant of short service regular commission on probation was Feburary 14, 1965.
Since the later date is Feburary 14, 1965, the date of appointment of respondents 3 and 4 as temporary Assistant Engineers could not be taken earlier than Feburary 14, 1965.
He further contends that the Government has no power to alter or modify the conditions of service with retrospective effect to the prejudice of the employee.
Mr. Mahajan relies upon a DB judgment of this Court in BL Bansal and others v. State of Punjab and others, 1995(1) RSJ 736 : 1995(2) SCT 1, which, according to him, deals with similar situation as is available in this case, in which the very service rules, dealing with determination of seniority, came for discussion, as are in this case.
According to him, the matter is no more res-integra and stands clinched in favour of the petitioners, by DB judgment of this Court in BL Bansal's case (supra).
5.
The cause of petitioners has been opposed.
Written statement has, however, been filed on behalf of respondents 1 and 2.
Mr. Patwalia, however, appears for respondents 3 and 4 and on the basis of pleadings raised by respondents 1 and 2 in the written statement filed by them, he too contests the cause of petitioners.
6.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondents 1 and 2, some preliminary objections, like petition involves disputed questions of fact and there is delay and laches for challenging some of the orders as also that no joint petition by six petitioners was incompetent and which preliminary objections, in view of this Court, are of no consequence.
It has also been pleaded on merits of the controversy that respondents 3 and 4 were given short service commission on probation w.e.f.
December 7, 1963 and October 10, 1963 respectively and not from Feburary 14, 1965.
In fact, they were confirmed in short service commission on Feburary 14, 1965 after satisfactory completion of training and probation period.
It is further pleaded that according to letter dated July 17, 1964 they were deemed to have been treated as employees of the State Government w.e.f.
the date of their passing final examination in Engineering or from the date of grant of emergency commission, whichever was later.
Accordingly, both the respondents, who were given Commission on probation in the Army in 1963 and who passed B.Sc.
Engg.
(Final) on May 20, 1964, were deemed to have joined civil service under the State Government w.e.f.
May 20, 1964, the date of passing B.Sc.
Engg.
examination in view of letter aforesaid.
It has further been pleaded by respondents 1 and 2 that according to the instructions dated April 6, 1964 (Annexure R-6), pre-final and final year students of the Engineering colleges in the State of Punjab were to be appointed as Temporary Assistant Engineers in the relevant branches of the State Public Works Department from the dates of grant of provisional short service regular commission to them and they were to be deemed to have been seconded to military duty from the said dates whereas according to letter dated July 17, 1964, Annexure R-1, Engineering students who were selected for Commission during their studies should be formally appointed as TAEs in Punjab PWD from the dates of their passing the final year examination or the dates from which they got emergency commission, whichever was later.
In the representation of respondent No. 4, the Government, vide its letter dated June 13-16, 1986, conveyed that in view of the advice given by the Chief Secretary to the Government of Haryana, respondent No. 4 - C.L.
Garg was entitled to seniority in Class II service as temporary Assistant Engineer w.e.f.
the date of grant of provisional short service commission as per letter aforesaid (Annexure R-6).
7.
It appears the controversy in this case is with regard to deemed date of appointment of respondents 3 and 4 in pursuance of letter dated July 17, 1964.
At this stage, it would be useful to see as to whether the contention of Mr. Mahajan that the matter is no more res-integra and stands clinched in favour of the petitioners by an authoritative pronouncement of this Court in BL Bansal's case (supra) is correct or not.
Mr. Mahajan is right in contending that if it is a covered matter, nothing else is required to be seen.
The facts of the case aforesaid (BL Bansal's case) reveal that the question posed by the Division Bench for determination was with regard to scope, ambit and object of rule 10-A of Punjab Service of Engineers Class-II PWD (B&R Branch) Rules, 1965.
The petitioners in the said case had prayed for issuance of a direction to respondents 1 and 2 therein for the grant of benefit under the aforesaid rule for the purposes of seniority from the dates they got provisional Short Service Regular Commission and for a further direction to the respondents to frame seniority of the members of the Punjab Service of Engineers (Class II) in accordance with the rules and give them consequential benefits of seniority in the Punjab Service of Engineers Class I.
The learned Single Judge had directed the respondents to give benefit to the petitioners for the purpose of seniority on the basis of Rule 10-A of the Rules.
Petitioners in the said case had pleaded that during the Indo-China conflict in the year 1962 and proclamation of National Emergency in the country, the Government of India finalised a scheme for selecting candidates for the grant of Short Service Regular Commission in the Indian Army in the Corps of Engineers, Signals and Electrical and Mechanical Engineers from amongst the First year students studying in different institutions in the country.
Technical boards were constituted, who visited the different institutions nominated in the list circulated by the Government of India vide letter dated 2131963.
Amongst others, this letter was addressed to the Chief Secretary of the Punjab Government with a request for issuance of immediate necessary instructions to the Heads of the Engineering Colleges, Institutions concerned to afford all necessary assistance to such Boards and to give the scheme a wide publicity.
The Ministry of Defence, Government of India had issued instructions regarding grant of Short Service Regular Commission in the Corps of Engineers, Signals and Electrical and Mechanical Engineers to the pre-final and final year students of the degree/diploma courses in Engineering.
It was further stated that the question of providing incentives to such Engineers, who were willing to take commission in the Army had been considered and it was felt that it was necessary to provide incentive to final year students of the Punjab Engineering College by first recruiting them as Temporary Assistant Engineers and then retaining their lien against the post specially created for the aforesaid purpose so that they could be absorbed in the State civil service on demobilisation and cesation of the emergency.
As the recruitment to the post of Temporary Assistant Engineers as direct recruit was to be made through Public Service Commission from amongst such candidates who possessed the minimum qualification laid down in Appendix `B' to the rule, it was felt necessary to relax the minimum qualification in favour of such candidates who opted to join the Short Service Commission.
The Public Service Commission was requested by the State Government to convey its approval to the proposal of the Government, who vide its letter dated 10.9.1963 conveyed that the commission agreed to the proposal contained in para 3 of the aforesaid letter.
The notification dated 2751964 was issued by the Governor of Punjab in exercise of the powers vested in him under Article 320(3) of the Constitution of India for the purpose of making necessary amendment to the Punjab Public Service Commission (Limitation of Function) Regulations, 1955 where item No. 41 to Schedule `A' and Item No. 34 to Schedule `E' to the said Regulations were incorporated mentioning therein that Temporary Assistant Engineers against which pre-final and final year students of the Engineering college in the State of Punjab are appointed on their being granted provisional Short Service Regular Commission.
Vide letter dated 641964 the Government of Punjab conveyed the approval of encouraging the students who volunteer for Short Service Regular Commission by deciding that pre-final and final year students of the Engineering Colleges in Punjab shall be appointed as Temporary Assistant Engineers in the concerned branches of the Public Works Department from the date of grant of provisional short service Regular Commission to them and they shall be deemed to have been seconded to Military duty from the said dates.
Petitioners in the said case further pleaded that they were studying in the final year of Engineering courses in the Punjab Engineering College, Chandigarh and Thapar Engg.
College, Patiala during the months of March and October, 1963 respectively.
They claimed to have been pursuaded to volunteer their services for the Indian Army in view of the exigencies of the force arising out of the proclamation of National emergency.
They also pleaded that they were given provisional Short Service Commission w.e.f.
3031963 and 30101963 respectively.
While in the army service the writ petitioners were asked by the Army Head Quarters to send their applications and willingness for absorption in the civil service after demobilisation from the Army.
They gave their option and willingness to be absorbed in the civil service on demobilisation from the Army.
They were released from the Army after the completion of their tenure as Short Service Regular Commission Officers on 451971 and 1251972 respectively.
Thereafter, they were absorbed as SDOs in the Punjab Service of Engineers Class II (B&R) on 451971 and 1251972 respectively.
Petitioners further stated that the post against which they were absorbed had already been taken out of the purview of the Public Service Commission and the requisite qualification of Bachelor of Engineers had been relaxed.
At the time of their joining service in the civil service, no letter of appointment was issued but subsequently such letters were issued in the month of August, 1972 in which it was specifically mentioned that their seniority will be determined in accordance with the instructions contained in Punjab Government letter dated 641964 as soon as these instructions were given the shape of statutory rules under Article 309 of the Constitution of India.
Petitioners were promoted as Executive Engineers in the Punjab Service of Engineers Class I in the month of December, 1972.
The matter was contested but, as mentioned above, learned Single Judge, dealing with the writ petition, determined the core issue in favour of the petitioners.
Letters Patent Bench, in an appeal preferred by the respondent-State, while dealing with Rule 10-A as also Annexure P-5 in the said case and Annexure R-6 in the present case, observed :-  "Even Annexure P/5 deals with concessions to civilian employees and others who joined the military service during the emergency, promises absorption, after demobilisation and did not refer to providing incentives in the matter of seniority or other service benefits.
Rule 10-A was incorporated in January, 1973 admittedly after about a decade of the writ petitioners joining the Indian Army.
It specifically mentions that recruitment of pre- final and final year students of Engineering Colleges, as the writ petitions were, their deputation to the military duty, their absorption after release from the military service, relaxation of qualifications and other concessions with retrospective effect shall be regulated in the manner specifically mentioned in the Punjab Government Circular dated 641964.
The aforesaid letter has been dealt with herein earlier wherein it is specifically mentioned that, "it has been decided that pre-final and final year students of the Engineering Colleges in the State of Punjab should be appointed as temporary Assistant Engineers in the relevant Branches of the State of Punjab Public Works Department from the date of grant of provisional Short Service Regular Commission to them and they should be deemed to have seconded to military service from the said date..." This annexure does not refer to those who had been appointed to the posts prior to 641964.
It appears that after the writ petitioners had joined the Army service, the State felt the necessity of having some more Engineers in the military service for which Annexure P/5 was issued with the promises detailed therein.
All these persons who were persuaded to join the Army in pursuance of the letter dated 641964 can prefer their claim for the grant of assumed concession even in the form of seniority or other service benefits but the petitioners who had admittedly joined the Armed Forced prior to 641964 cannot prefer any such claim which if admitted would adversely affect the service conditions of those who were in service at the time when the writ petitioners joined the Indian Army.
The writ petitioners were promised of concessions for the first time in the month of January, 1973 when Rule 10-A was incorporated and no document reflecting any type of assurance has been brought to our notice which could justify the claim of the writ petitioners regarding the assurances allegedly given to them for the purposes of seniority with effect from 1963.
Notwithstanding the fact that the Rules could not be altered to the detriment of those who were already in service, the writ petitioners in effect and essence miserably failed to bring to our notice that any such incentive or assurance was given to them by the State Executive.
The learned Single Judge proceeded on wrong assumptions and thus came to the conclusions which cannot be justified on the touchstone of legal pronouncements and settled position of law".
It has further been observed by the Division Bench :  "In the instant case, the respondent-State has specifically taken a plea that the benefits as enumerated in the letter dated 641964 (Annexure P/5) were to accrue to the petitioners as soon as the instructions contained therein were given the shape of statutory rules under Article 309 of the Constitution of India.
It was decided by the respondent-State that benefit of Rule 10-A could be given only to those who joined the military service after 641964 and not prior to that.
Arguing on behalf of the State, Mr. Jagmohan Singh Chaudhary, Addl.
Advocate General, has contended that the learned Single Judge appears to have ignored the important aspects of the matter, as discussed herein above, and passed the judgment impugned in the appeal more being influenced by the fact that the writ petitioners had served the nation at the time of national emergency.
The learned Single Judge ignored the fact that the writ petitioners had been duly compensated for their participation in the Army service as rules for their recruitment were relaxed and despite non-possessing of the education qualifications they were granted provisional short Service Regular Commission after being appointed as Temporary Assistant Engineers when such posts of Engineers were specifically withdrawn from the purview of the Punjab Public Service Commission.
The judgment of the learned Single Judge cannot be upheld and is liable to be set aside."
8.
It is conceded position between the learned Counsel representing the parties that whereas Punjab incorporated in the Rules, Rule 10-A in January 1973, so far as Haryana is concerned, this rule is not there at all in the Rules.
So far as letter of 1964 is concerned, it has been specifically held by the Division Bench that the same does not refer to those who had been appointed prior to 641964 as also that all those persons who were persuaded to join the Army in pursuance of the letter dated 641964 can prefer their claim for the grant of assumed concession in the form of seniority or other service benefits but the petitioners who had admittedly joined Armed Forces prior to 641964 cannot prefer any such claim which if admitted would adversely affect the service conditions of those who were in service when the petitioners joined the Army.
It is, thus, apparent that whereas Rule 10-A which is not in the Rules as also the letter of 1964 cannot in this case come to the resuce of the respondents to give them the deemed date of appointment as has been given to them by the respondent-State.
9.
Mr. Patwalia, learned Counsel for respondents 3 and 4, however, contends that in the judgment aforesaid even though such was the interpretation, yet the petitioners of the said case were given the date of appointment from 641964 even though the same was by virtue of concession made by the learned Counsel representing the State as also that judgment aforesaid is subject matter of review as also that there were numerous grounds on which the judgment passed by the Division Bench could be faulted.
He also contends that numerous other points which did arise were neither canvassed nor any decision given thereon by the learned Division Bench.
This Court is, however, of the view that these grounds pressed into service by Mr. Patwalia for either giving the respondents the deemed date as 641964 as had been given on the basis of concession in BL Bansal's case (supra) or to hold that a Division Bench is not correct either for the reason that there were certain points to say that the judgment is not correct or that certain other points could be canvassed before the learned Division Bench cannot be sustained.
Concession given in the case aforesaid cannot mutatis mutandi apply in this case.
This Court is not sitting in appeal rendered by the Division Bench.
That apart, if validity of the decision rendered by the larger Bench is to be gone into by a single Judge or smaller Bench, there will be no finality attached to any judgment.
Nothing at all has been pointed out before this Court that might persuade this Court to refer the matter to a larger Bench.
10.
For the reasons mentioned above, respondents 3 and 4 cannot be given deemed date on the basis of letter dated 641964.
As per Class II Service Rules, the petitioners having passed their examination earlier than respondents 3 and 4 as also having been appointed as Assistant Engineer prior in time cannot rank junior to respondents 3 and 4.
The respondent-State is, thus, directed to re-frame the seniority vis-a-vis petitioners and respondents 3 and 4 as early as possible in view of the observations made by this Court and, in any case, not later than two months from today.
The writ petition is allowed in the manner aforesaid but there shall be no order as to costs.