SS Sudhalkar, J - This petition has been filed to quash the orders Annexures P-6 and P-11 passed respectively by the Superintendent of Police, Rohtak and the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Rohtak Range, Rohtak.
2.
A brief reference to the facts would enable us to determine whether the impugned orders suffer from any illegality warranting interference by this Court in exercise of its certiorari jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution.
The petitioner was enrolled in Haryana Police on 3.12.1988 and he was posted as Constable after completion of training.
A departmental enquiry was initiated against him on 8111991 for his alleged absence from duty since 6111991.
It appears that the petitioner did not take part in the enquiry and, therefore, ex parte proceedings were held against him.
The enquiry officer submitted his report with the finding that the petitioner was guilty of the allegations levelled against him.
The Superintendent of Police, Rohtak issued show cause notice, dated 19.5.1992 and called upon the petitioners to explain why he not dismissed from service.
The notice was accompanied by a report of the Deputy Inspector of Police who had held an enquiry into the allegation of absence from duty against the petitioner.
The petitioner contested the show cause notice by filing reply dated 861992.
After considering the reply filed by the petitioner, the Superintendent of Police, Rohtak passed the impugned order Annexure P-6 dated 11692 and dismissed the former from service on the ground of habitual absenteeism.
The appeal filed by the petitioner against the order of dismissal was rejected by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Rohtak Range, Rohtak.
The petitioner challenged order of punishment and the appellate order by filing CWP No. 13962 of 1993.
A Division Bench of this Court accepted his writ petition on 3101994 and quashed the appellate order with a direction to the Appellate Authority to pass fresh order within three months.
Thereafter the Deputy Inspector General of Police rejected the appeal of the petitioner vide order Annexure P-11 dated 1251995.
The petitioner has challenged the order of punishment as well as the order passed by the Appellate Authority on the ground of violation of provisions of Article 311 of the Constitution of India, the Punjab Police Rules and the principles of natural Justice.
3.
The respondents have contested the writ petition by stating that the petitioner is a habitual absentee from duty.
In preliminary objection and paragraph 4 of the reply to the writ petition, the respondents have set out the details of the periods of absence of the petitioner between 22.7.1989 and 861992 and the have stated that after a due enquiry the petitioner has been dismissed from service.
The respondents have further stated that the enquiry was held against the petitioner in accordance with the provisions of the Punjab Police Rules and the Punishing Authority passed the impugned order after careful consideration of the entire record of the petitioner.
4.
In support of the writ petition, Shri I.S.
Balhara urged the following contentions :-  (1) The charge-sheet served upon the petitioners was wholly vague inasmuch as it did not contain specific reference to the period of absence of the petitioner from duty and on the basis of such a vague charge sheet no punishment could be awarded by the Superintendent of Police.
(2) The enquiry officer held ex parte proceedings without giving reasonable opportunity to the petitioner.
(3) The findings recorded by the enquiry officer are perverse.
(4) The Superintendent of Police took into consideration the past adverse record of the petitioner without giving any notice or opportunity of hearing to him to explain the allegation of previous absence.
(5) The Punishing Authority did not consider the representation submitted by the petitioner in an objective manner and it has not given any reason for imposing the extreme penalty of dismissal on a trivial ground of absence from duty.
(6) The Punishing Authority did not follow the Rule 16.2 of the Punjab Police Rules and the punishment of dismissal has been awarded without holding the petitioner guilty of gravest misconduct or of habitual misconduct proving the incorrigibility and complete unfitness for police service.
5.
The appellate order has been challenged on the ground that the Appellate Authority has not taken into consideration the various points raised by the petitioner in his memorandum of appeal, and, thus, the order passed by it is not a speaking order.
Shri Balhara further submitted that the enquiry officer as well as Punishing Authority failed to consider the evidence produced by the petitioner showing that he was being treated for ailment and this by itself should be sufficient to quash the entire proceedings.
6.
Shri RN Raina, learned Deputy Advocate General argued that the petitioner has consistently absented from duty after joining service which proved that he is a habitual absentee and he is not interested in serving the Government.
Shri Raina pointed out that in a short span of 2- years of service, the petitioner had absented from duty on fourteen different occasions which sufficiently proved his unfitness for police service.
7.
After having thoughtfully considered the rival contentions and having gone through the record of the case, we are of the opinion that the writ petition does not merit acceptance.
Before considering the various submissions of the learned counsel, we must keep in mind the settled principle of law that the proceedings of enquiry cannot be quashed by the Court unless it is shown that violation of rules of procedure or the principles of natural justice has caused serious prejudice to the delinquent employee.
In this regard, we may refer to a recent decision of the Supreme Court in State Bank of Patiala v. SK Sharma, 1996(2) RSJ 41 : 1996(2) SCT 568. in which the Supreme Court has summarised the principles in the following words :-  ``(1) An order passed imposing a punishment on an employee consequent upon a disciplinary departmental enquiry in violation of the rules/regulations/statutory provisions governing such enquiries should not be set aside automatically.
The court or the Tribunal should enquire whether (a) of the provisions violated is of a substantive nature, or (b) whether it is procedural in character.
x x x x x x x x  (3) In the case of violation of a procedural provision, the position is this : procedural provisions are generally meant for affording a reasonable and adequate opportunity to the delinquent officer/employee.
They are, generally speaking, conceived in his interest.
Violation of any and every procedural provision cannot be said to automatically vitiate the enquiry held or order passed.
Except cases falling under `no notice', `no opportunity' and `no hearing' categories, the complaint of violation of procedural provision should be examined from the point of view of prejudice, viz. whether such violation has prejudiced the delinquent officer/employee in defending himself properly and effectively.
If it is found that he has been so prejudiced, appropriate orders have to be made to repair and remedy and prejudice including setting aside the enquiry and/or the order of punishment.
If no prejudice is established to have resulted therefrom, it is obvious, no interfere is called for.
In this connection, it may be remembered that there may be certain procedural provisions which are of a fundamental character, whose violation is by itself proof of prejudice.
The Court may not insist on proof of prejudice in such cases.
As explained in the body of the judgment, take a case where there is a provision expressly providing that after the evidence of the employer-government is over, the employee shall be given an opportunity to lead defence in his evidence, and in a given case, the enquiry officer, does not give that opportunity in spite of the delinquent officer/employer asking for it, the prejudice is self evident.
No proof of prejudice as such need be called for in such a cse.
To repeat, the test is one of prejudice, i.e., whether the person has received a fair hearing considering all things.
Now, this very aspect can also be looked at from the point of view of directory and mandatory provision, if one is so inclined.
The principle stated under (4) hereinbelow is only another way of looking at the same aspect as is dealt with herein and not a different or distinct principle.
(4)(a) In the case of procedural provision which is not of a mandatory character, the complaint of violation has to be examined from the stand point of substantial compliance.
Be that as it may, the order passed in violation of such a provision can be set aside only where such violation has occasioned prejudice to the delinquent employee.
xx xx xx xx'' A look at the record of the petitioner shows that he absented from duty on the following dates :-  ``1.
22789 to 10.9.89 51 days.
2.
29190 to 31.1.90 2 days.
3.
10390 to 20390 10 days.
4.
22390 to 23.3.90 1 day.
5.
16590 to 25590 9 days.
6.
12690 to 19.6.90 7 days.
7.
231190 to 26.11.90 3 days.
8.
23191 to 24191 1 day.
9.
8291 to 4.3.91 26 days.
10.
10.4.91 to 17.4.91 7 days.
11.
26.5.91 to 1691 6 days.
12.
9691 to 12691 3 days.
13.
20.6.91 to 21691 1 day.
14.
6.11.91 to 8692 216 days.
Total 341 days.
8.
For some of these periods of absence he has been punished by parade drill on 1971991, 9289, 22.4.1989 and 571990.
The petitioner has not chosen to controvert the assertion made by the respondents about the periods of his absence on different occasions.
It must, therefore, be taken as correct that the petitioner absented on fourteen occasions in his total service span of three years.
9.
Argument of the learned counsel that the proceedings held against the petitioner are vitiated due to violation of Article 311 of the Constitution, the Police Rules and the principles of natural justice deserves to be examined in the light of the fact that before commencement of enquiry the petitioner was given three notices.
He did not appear in the proceedings of enquiry which necessitated ex parte proceedings.
It must, therefore, be held that the petitioner is to blame himself for the situation in which he was placed due to ex parte proceedings.
In our view, the proceedings of enquiry cannot be held as vitiated due to holding of ex parte enquiry.
10.
Argument of the learned counsel about non-consideration of reply filed by the petitioner and taking into account of past misconduct without notice may have been accepted in the ordinary circumstances, but in the present case it is not in dispute that the petitioner absented on fourteen different occasions in a span of about three years.
It can, thus, be said that even though the Superintendent of Police did not act in strict compliance of the provisions of Rule 1624 of the Police Rules and principles of natural justice inasmuch as he considered past punishments without giving proper intimation to the petitioner, no prejudice can be said to have been suffered by the petitioner on that account so as to vitiate the proceedings of enquiry or the order of punishment.
For the same very reason, the impugned order cannot be castigated on the ground of violation of principles of natural justice.
The order passed by the Appellate Authority also does not suffer from any error.
Perusal of that order shows that the Appellate Authority considered all the contentions urged on behalf of the petitioner and came to the conclusion that the proceedings of enquiry were held in consonance with the rules of natural justice and the petitioner was punished for proved act of misconduct.
The Appellate Authority has taken note of the fact that the petitioner is said to have been treated as an out-door patient and not as an in-door patient and, therefore, there was no reason for him to absent from the proceedings of the enquiry nor was there any justification for him not to appear before the competent Authority and seek leave for the period of absence.
The Appellate Authority has also taken into consideration the gravity of allegation levelled against the petitioner in the context of his service record and has come to the conclusion that no interference was called for with the order of punishment.
11.
Argument of the learned counsel recording vagueness of the charge levelled against the petitioner has no merit whatsoever.
The petitioner never felt aggrieved by alleged vagueness in the charge levelled against him.
Therefore, he cannot now be heard to say that he could not defend himself because of alleged vagueness in the charge sheet.
We also find that the petitioner was conveyed the allegation in specific terms, namely, that he was absent from duty with effect from 6111991.
It cannot, therefore, be held that the order of punishment is bad on account of denial of reasonable of opportunity of defence to the petitioner.
12.
The next question is whether the petitioner had notice of absence from duty upto 861992.
In the charge sheet against the petitioner, it is mentioned that he remained absent in the evening on 6111991 and was absenting without any reason in spite of the notices issued thrice for remaining present.
The charge sheet is dated 2911992 and, therefore, the allegation of remaining absent till the date of charge can be deemed to have been covered in the charge.
The said allegations are held to have been proved.
13.
Learned counsel may be right in criticising the order of Punishing Authority in so far as it held the petitioner guilty of remaining absent upto 861992, but that, in our opinion, cannot vitiate the impugned order.
The judgments of this Court in State of Punjab v. Parkash Chand, 1992(1) SCT 123 (P&H) : 1992(1) SLR 174 and Kuldip Singh v. Pepsu Road Transport Corporation, Patiala, 1996(1) RSJ 187 do not have any direct bearing on the facts of this case.
14.
At this stage, it will be proper for us to consider that the petitioner is a habitual offender and has been punished earlier for remaining absent.
Therefore, the absence of the petitioner for the above-mentioned period and also as no reason was shown by the petitioner for the same, cannot be treated lightly and we do not find it proper to hold that the punishment of dismissal is harsh.
On the contrary, a person serving in a disciplined force like the police force is expected to be regular in his duties and absence of this nature leads to disturbance in the daily functioning of the police and we do not find it proper to encourage such absence.
15.
For the reasons mentioned above, we hold that the writ petition is without substance and it is liable to be dismissed.
Order accordingly.