THB Chalapathi, J - In this writ petition, the petitioners are seeking issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the State Government to refer the industrial dispute for adjudication to the Labour Court.
2.
The petitioners are workmen working on different posts in KC Textile Mills Limited, the second respondent herein.
Their services have been terminated in the year 1992 though they have put in more than three to eleven years' service.
The petitioners issued Notice of Demand and sought the State Government to refer their dispute to the Labour Court for adjudication.
The State Government by its orders dated 981994, 881994 and 1281994, vide Annexures P-4 to P-12, declined to refer the dispute for adjudication on the ground that the Management has been sending letters to the petitioners repeatedly to join, but the petitioners absented themselves from duty and, therefore, their services were terminated.
Challenging the same, the petitioners filed this writ petition.
3.
It is now well settled that the State Government has to no power to decline to refer the dispute for adjudication by deciding itself the dispute.
The State Government has to see whether there exists an industrial dispute.
It has no power to make an inquiry and on the basis of inquiry it cannot reject or decline the reference to the Labour Court for adjudication.
It is the case of the workmen that their services were wrongfully terminated.
Whether the petitioners absented themselves voluntarily or whether abandoned the services is a disputed question of fact which can only be decided by the Labour Court after recording the evidence of the parties.
It is not the function of the State Government to go into the evidence and record a finding itself.
I am, therefore, of the opinion that the orders of the State Government declining to refer the dispute to the Labour Court are liable to be set aside.
4.
Accordingly, I allow the writ petition and direct the State government to refer the dispute to the Labour Court within two months from today.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.