NK Sodhi, J - This order will dispose of two Civil Writ Petitions 6256 and 14598 of 1992 in which identical questions of law and fact arise and which were ordered to be heard together by the Motion Bench as they are directed against similar awards passed by the Labour Court deciding the references against the petitioner management and in favour of the workmen.
2.
In both these cases the services of the workmen were terminated without holding any inquiry nor was any compensation paid to them.
The terminations gave rise to industrial disputes which were referred for adjudication to the Labour - Court-respondent.
The common stand taken by the management before the Labour Court was that with a view to meet the emergent nature of work, the management was engaging persons on temporary basis for fixed periods as its work load was constantly fluctuating.
It was pleaded that workman had been employed for specific periods and that their services automatically came to an end by efflux of time in terms of their letters of appointment.
Such a termination, according to the management, did not amount to retrenchment within the meaning of section 2(oo) (bb) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for short, the Act) and, therefore, terminations were legal as well as justified.
3.
On a consideration of the evidence led by the parties, the Labour Court came to the conclusion that the workmen were being appointed for 89 days and after giving notional breaks of one or two days they were re-appointed.
It was also held that the management did not comply with the provision of section 25-F of the Act before terminating their services.
Such a termination was held to be neither justified nor in order because the workmen had admittedly worked for more than 240 days preceding the date on which their services were terminated.
The references were thus decided in favour of the workmen and against the management directing the former to be re-instated with continuity of service and full back wages with effect from the dates of the demand notices.
These awards have been challenged by the management in this petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution  4.
After hearing counsel for the parties and having perused the impugned award, I find no ground to interfere with the findings recorded therein.
The findings recorded by the Labour Court are based on evidence and they do not warrant any interference by this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution Consequently, the writ petitions are dismissed leaving the parties to bear their own costs.