PK Jain, J - The petitioner was selected as a clerk on regular basis by the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana and he joined his duties as such in the Excise and Taxation Department on 17.1.1977.
Before joining the said service the petitioner rendered Military Service during emergency with effect from 26101962 to 1011968 and thereafter he was discharged from military service on compassionate grounds.
2.
On account of the external aggression by Chinese forces on the Indian Territory an emergency was imposed by the Government of India in 1962.
In order to attract youngmen to join military service at that critical juncture the Central Government and the Governments of the States announced certain benefits to be given to those youngmen who join military service.
Accordingly the Punjab Government framed rules under Article 309 of the Constitution of India known as the Punjab Government National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965 (hereinafter called the Punjab Rules).
These rules were adopted by the State of Haryana also.
Rule 4 of the said rules, as it stood originally in so far as relevant for our purposes reads as follows :-  "4.
Increments, seniority and pension : Period of military service shall count for increments, seniority and pension as under :-  (i) Increments : The period spent by a person on military service, after attaining the minimum age prescribed for appointment to any service or post, to which he is appointed, shall count for increments.
Where no such minimum age is prescribed the minimum age shall be as laid down in Rules 3.9, 310 and 311 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume II.
This concession shall, however, be admissible only on first appointment.
(ii) Seniority : The period of military service mentioned in clause (i) shall be taken into consideration for the purpose of determining the seniority of a person who has rendered military service."
By a subsequent Notification dated November 5, 1976, the Governor of Haryana in exercise of its powers under Article 309 of the Constitution amended the Punjab Rules as applicable to Haryana by inserting a proviso to Rule 4 which reads as under :-  "Provided that a person who has been released from military service on compassionate grounds shall not he entitled to any concession under this rule."
Thus the persons who had been released from military service on compassionate grounds were singled out for denying benefits of Rule 4 reproduced above.
3.
The petitioner along with others being aggrieved by the amendment made by notification dated November 5, 1976 by the Governor of Haryana, challenged the validity and the vires of the said amendment by way of Civil Writ Petition No. 16408-17 of 1984 filed before the apex court titled as Kalu Ram Sangwan and others v. State of Haryana and another, while placing reliance upon an earlier judgment rendered by the apex court in Ex. Captain KC Arora and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1984(3) SCC 281 wherein the said amendment was held to be ultra vires of the Constitution and bad, accepted the petition and held that the petitioners therein were also entitled to the benefit of Rule 4 as it originally stood and the mere fact that they were released from military service on compassionate grounds cannot disentitle them as they satisfy the requirement of Rule 4 of the Punjab Rules as it originally stood.
It was further held by their Lordships that the grounds on which they were released were not material and if once they were held ex- military servicemen, they were entitled to the benefit of the said rules.
Accordingly, a writ in the nature of mandamus was issued directing the State of Haryana and the State Transport Commissioner, Haryana, to confer the benefits of ex-military/air force service to those petitioners within a period of six months from the date of that judgment which was rendered on 10.5.1995.
4.
After the aforesaid judgment of the apex court the Excise and Taxation Commissioner, Haryana, issued an order dated 8101985 (Annexure P.1) whereby the benefit of military service during the emergency period with effect from 26101962 to 1011968 (i.e. 5 years 2 months and 16 days) was given to the petitioner and his seniority in the Gradation list of the District Ministerial Staff was fixed in between Shri Rameshwar Dutt 195 and Dharam Pal 196 and the date of joining in the department in respect of the petitioner was mentioned as notional date as 311.1971 on account of the benefit given to him for his military service.
It appears that certain departmental enquiry was initiated against the petitioner for misappropriation/embezzlement of the official funds and the punishment was imposed by order dated 2331986 by the Deputy Excise and Taxation Commissioner, Faridabad, under whom he was working at the relevant time.
The petitioner was placed under suspension also on 1821989 but was reinstated vide order dated 7.3.1989 without prejudice to the decision of the enquiry pending against him.
5.
Meanwhile some members of the District Ministerial Establishment of Excise and Taxation department were promoted/posted as Assistants, Accountants/Junior Auditors vide order dated 741989, wherein the claim of the petitioner for promotion was ignored.
After passing of the order Annexure P-1 a seniority list was circulated amongst the staff in the year 1985 and the petitioner was shown at serial No. 241 and the date of joining of service in the department as clerk was shown as 17.1.1977 instead of 311.1971.
The petitioner raised objections before the respondents for refixing his seniority after counting his military service vide representation Annexure P4.
Thereafter a tentative seniority list was circulated on 1211995 wherein the petitioner has been shown at serial No. 101 whereas according to the petitioner he ought to have been shown at serial No. 5 after counting the military service (Annexure P.1).
6.
In the aforesaid circumstances the petitioner has filed this petition for a writ of mandamus directing the respondents for deciding his seniority in view of the order Annexure P.1 and to promote him from the date juniors to him were promoted as Assistants and also to quash the seniority list (Annexure P.3) and the confirmation list Annexure P5.
7.
Notice of motion was given to the respondents who have filed their reply.
It has been admitted that the petitioner joined as a clerk on regular basis with effect from 1811970 (F.N.).
The averments regarding rendering of military service by the petitioner, filing of the writ petition and the decision thereon and the issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to confer benefits of ex-military/air force service and accordingly passing of the order (Annexure P.1) thereby giving the benefit of military service to the petitioner and fixing his notional date of joining as 311.1971, have been admitted.
It has been stated that the case of the petitioner for promotion could not be considered as departmental enquiry was pending against him.
Later on he was punished and was also placed under suspension.
It has been admitted that a tentative seniority list had been circulated on 1211995 and in the said seniority list name of the petitioner has been shown at serial No. 202 and the date of appointment has been shown as 1111977.
The issuance of the order Annexure P5 has also been admitted but it has been stated that some posts have been kept vacant and the case of the petitioner would be considered after decision on the objections.
8.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have given our considered thought to the respective submissions made at the Bar.
An half hearted attempt was made by the learned State counsel to contend that in Writ Petitions No. 16408-16417 of 1984 the petitioner had not disclosed all the facts correctly and had made certain representations on account of which he could not be entitled to benefit of Rule 4 of the aforesaid Rules.
This contention is misconceived and deserves to be rejected outrightly.
The obvious reasons is that the earlier judgment in the aforesaid writ petitions rendered by the Supreme Court of India is inter-parties judgment and is binding on all the persons who were parties thereto.
This court cannot go into correctness or otherwise of that judgment.
If there was any misrepresentation or concealment of facts on the part of the present petitioner or that the petitioner was not entitled to the benefit of Rule 4 of the aforesaid rules as the same stood originally, the State ought to have raised those objections before the Supreme Court during the hearing of those writ petitions.
After the judgment was rendered on 10.5.1995, it does not lie in the mouth of the respondents to challenge the correctness of that judgment or to say that the petitioner was not entitled to the benefits granted by the issuance of a writ of mandamus by the Supreme Court.
Therefore, this contention, being without any merit, is hereby rejected.
9.
The only ground on which the promotion of the petitioner has been withheld and the benefit of the judgment dated 1051985 has not been given subsequently is that some departmental enquiry was initiated against the petitioner in which he was found guilty and was punished or that he was placed under suspension for some time.
But during the course of the hearing before us, learned State counsel has conceded that the petitioner has been exonerated of all those charges and reinstated with all back wages and benefits.
In other words the alleged ground raised by the respondents for denying promotion stands vanished.
It has not been disputed that after judgment rendered by the Supreme Court on 1051985, the benefit of the military service was given to the petitioner and his seniority was fixed by fixing his date of joining as 311.1971 vide order dated 8101985 (Annexure P.1).
Once that benefit has been given to the petitioner, the same could not be withdrawn at the whims of the respondents.
Even when the departmental enquiry was initiated against the petitioner on account of certain charges levelled against him, his date of joining fixed as 311.1971 could not be changed in any manner.
After the petitioner was exonerated of all the charges and was reinstated with full back wages and benefits, it was bounden duty of the respondents to consider the request of the petitioner for promotion as on 741989 when the clerks junior to him were promoted vide order Annexure P2.
The learned counsel for the respondents had no other option but to concede to this conclusion in the facts and circumstances of the case and the decision of the apex court cited above.
As a result this petition is allowed.
A writ in the nature of mandamus is issued to the respondents to fix seniority of the petitioner keeping in view the date of his joining to be 311.1971 as fixed vide order (Annexure P-1), and also to consider his case for promotion as Assistant/Accountant/Junior Auditor as on 741989 in modification of the order Annexure P2.
The petitioner on his promotion, shall be entitled to all the benefits including arrears of salary.
The respondents shall comply with this order within a period of two months from the date of receipt/production of the certified copy of this order.
No order as to costs.