NK Kapoor, J - This is unsuccessful plaintiff's regular second appeal.
Plaintiff filed a suit for declaration to the effect that he is not liable to pay rent for quarter bearing No. 213-D situated in Railway Colony, Ludhiana, from October, 1978 to April, 1984, as he ceased to occupy the said quarter for the said period.
As per averments made in the plaint, plaintiff was allotted the aforesaid quarter in the year 1977 when he was serving as Foreman at Ludhiana.
According to plaintiff he remained in possession of the quarter from September, 1977 to October, 1978 when he was transferred on his request to Jalandhar and so the vacated the said quarter.
It has been further stated in the plaint that though he had given the possession of the quarter way back in October, 1978, the respondents, however, with a view to unnecessary harass and otherwise also harbouring ill will as he had been successful in a litigation between the plaintiff and the defendants that defendants started making recovery for alleged rent of the quarter for the period from October, 1978 to April, 1984.
2.
Defendants put in appearance, filed written statement and controverted the various averments made in the plaint.
On the pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed :-  (i) Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the declaration as prayed for ?
OPP.
(ii) Whether notice under Section 80 CPC, was served on the defendant ?
OPP (iii) Whether this Court has got no jurisdiction to entertain in the present suit ?
OPD.
(iv) Relief.
3.
Trial Court vide judgment and decree dated 441985 dismissed the suit of the plaintiff.
Lower appellate Court once again examined the matter on facts as well as on law.
The lower appellate Court on careful perusal of the evidence affirmed the findings of the trial Court to the effect that there is no documentary evidence to prove the allegations of the plaintiff that vacated the disputed quarter from October, 1978.
Rather positive evidence on the file is that he remained in possession of the disputed quarter from October, 1978 to April, 1984.
For this reliance was also placed upon the electricity charges for the aforesaid period-Exhibits D-3 and D-4.
Accordingly, finding on issue No. 1 was affirmed.
Finding on issues No. 2 and 3 as these were not assailed by the appellant, was also affirmed.
Under issue No. 4, the Court came to the conclusion that a suit for declaration simpliciter is not maintainable.
As regards prayer made by the appellant seeking permission to file a fresh suit was declined in view of the decision of this Court reported as Jubedan Begam and others v. Sekhawat Ali Khan, AIR 1984 Punjab and Haryana 221.
Thus, the appeal was dismissed.
4.
Before me, the learned counsel for the appellant has almost reiterated the same submissions which did not find favour with the trial Court or with the lower appellate Court.
Admittedly, there is no proof on record that the plaintiff delivered back the possession of the quarter in dispute to the respondents in October, 1978.
Rather evidence adduced by the defendants clearly proves that plaintiff remained in occupation of the quarter till April, 1984.
It being a finding of fact is not vitiated in any manner.
The Courts below rightly held that simple suit for declaration was not maintainable.
Resultantly, I find no merit in the appeal and dismiss the same.
Parties shall, however, bear their own costs.
Appeal dismissed.