VK Jhanji, J - This shall dispose of Civil Writ Petitions No. 2012 of 1981 and 6067 of 1989.
2.
In Civil Writ Petition No. 2012 of 1981.
Vijay Parkash, petitioner, is seeking a writ in the nature of quo warranto calling upon respondents 3 and 4 to show as to how they are eligible to be appointed/hold the office of Executive Engineer as well as Sub Divisional Engineer, and also a writ in the nature of Mandamus directing the respondents to consider the petitioner's claim in accordance with rules for regular appointment as Executive Engineer with effect from the date the persons junior to him were appointed.
3.
In Civil Writ Petition No. 6067 of 1989, MK Garg, petitioner, is seeking a writ in the nature of Certiorari quashing the gradation-list of Executive Engineers circulated vide Memo.
dated 24.3.1989 (Annexure P-7) in Haryana State Agricultural Marketing Board (in short, the Board) wherein the petitioner has been shown at Sr. No. 9 whereas respondents 3 to 8 have been shown at Sr. Nos. 3 to 8 respectively.
4.
In brief, the facts as borne out of the pleadings are that petitioner, Vijay Parkash, who is a Graduate in Civil Engineering, joined service of the Board on 1431975 as Sub Divisional Engineer.
Respondent No. 3 namely MK Garg (petitioner in C.W.P.
No. 6067 of 1989) was born on 3091946.
He was appointed as Sub Divisional Engineer on ad hoc basis on 17.6.1975.
He was regularised w.e.f.
11111976 vide order dated 15.11.1976.
Respondent No. 4 ID Mittal, who has since expired, was born on 21.10.1948.
He joined the Board on ad hoc basis as Sub Divisional Engineer on 28.1.1976.
He too was regularised vide order dated 12111976.
Vijay Prakash having been appointed in March, 1975 on regular basis ranks senior to MK Garg and ID Mittal.
In the gradation-list as it stood on 1121976, petitioner's name appeared at Sr. No. 7 while that of respondents 3 and 4 at Sr. Nos. 10 and 12 respectively.
Petitioner has averred that MK Garg and ID Mittal having joined service after the petitioner and being junior to him were not eligible for promotion but they have been promoted vide orders dated 1361978 and 24.1.1979 respectively without considering the claim of the petitioner.
Petitioner has further averred that he made a representation to the Chairman and on learning that no action was being taken on the same, he filed an appeal under Section 42 of the Punjab Agricultural Produce Markets Act, 1961 (in short, 1961 Act) read with Rule 15 of the Haryana State Agricultural Marketing Board Service Rules, 1974 (in short, 1974 Rules).
His appeal was rejected.
On these averments, grievance has been made in the petition that appointments of MK Garg and ID Mittal as Sub Divisional Engineers, their promotion as Executive Engineer and order in appeal, Annexure P-10, are wholly illegal, unfair, unconstitutional and against the principles of natural justice.
Appointment of MK Garg and ID Mittal as Sub Divisional Engineer has been stated to be contrary to rule 5 of the 1974 Rules as on the date of their appointment as Sub Divisional Engineer, they were more than 27 years of age whereas the age required under the rules is 27 years.
5.
The Board in its written statement has justified the appointment of MK Garg and ID Mittal by stating that relaxation in age was accorded by the Government vide its letter No. 6050-Agri.II(4)-76/22326 dated 10111976 as per rule 5 read with rule 17 of the 1974 Rules.
In regard to their promotion, it has been averred that they were promoted as Executive Engineer on purely temporary basis as they fulfilled the qualifications and experience prescribed for the post of Executive Engineer.
MK Garg and ID Mittal in their written statement have averred that the petitioner cannot challenge their appointment by way of writ in the nature of quo warranto after a period of almost six years.
They have further averred that on the date of their promotion as Executive Engineer, they had more than five years' experience on the post of Sub Divisional Engineer/Executive Engineer and under the rules they have rightly been promoted.
6.
In Civil Writ Petition No. 6067 of 1989, MK Garg, petitioner (who is respondent No. 3 in C.W.P.
No. 2012 of 1981) has averred that he was promoted on the post of Executive Engineer on 1361978.
On the other hand, respondents 3 to 8 including Vijay Parkash (petitioner in C.W.P.
No. 2012 of 1981) were promoted subsequent to his promotion but they have been given deemed date of promotion in order of inter-se seniority in the cadre of Sub Divisional Engineers.
Thus, he is making a grievance that though on the basis of length of service on the post of Executive Engineer he is senior to respondents 3 to 8, yet in the tentative gradation-list issued vide Memo.
dated 26121983, petitioner has been shown at Sr. No. 9 and respondents 3 to 8 at Sr. Nos. 3 to 8 respectively.
This action of the respondents is being sought to be quashed being violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India, and also in violation of 1974 Rules.
7.
The Board in its written statement to the writ petition filed by MK Garg has defended its action by stating that MK Garg was promoted as Executive Engineer on purely temporary basis and in the promotion order it was made clear that promotion would not confer any benefit/right to the petitioner for any purpose other than the payment of salary as Executive Engineer.
Respondents 4 to 6 in their written statement have averred that while promoting MK Garg, the Board was not justified in counting two years ad hoc service in P.W.D., Public Health, i.e. from March 1973 to March 1975, towards five years' experience required for the purpose of promotion to the post of Executive Engineer.
8.
Mr. SS Nijjar, Sr. Advocate, counsel for MK Garg, has contended that by length of his continuous service as Executive Engineer, MK Garg would rank senior to the private respondents, though junior to them in the cadre of Sub Divisional Engineer.
He also contended that even if promotion was irregular, MK Garg having continued on the post, his appointment would be deemed to have been regular and shall relate back to the date he was promoted.
In support of his arguments, he has referred to 1974 Rules.
In answer to these submissions, learned counsel for the private respondents including Vijay Parkash have contended that Board was not justified in promoting MK Garg by counting his two years' ad hoc service in P.W.D.
Public Health and also ad hoc service in the department towards five years' experience required for the purpose of promotion to the post of Executive Engineer.
They thus have contended that in the gradation-list, MK Garg has rightly been placed below them as he was junior in the rank of Sub-Divisional Engineer.
Counsel also contended that MK Garg and ID Mittal were eligible for appointment to the post of Sub Divisional Engineer as on the date of appointment they were more than 27 years of age whereas requirement under the rules is 27 years.
9.
The primary question involved in the present case is whether MK Garg is entitled to the benefit of period of service rendered by him in the P.W.D.
Public Health from March 1973 to March 1975 and his ad hoc service with the Board w.e.f.
471975 to 11111976 when he was regularised for the purpose of reckoning his eligibility for promotion to the post of Executive Engineer and also for the purpose of seniority.
In order to determine this question, it is necessary to notice rules 7, 10 and 12 of the 1974 Rules and column 2 of Appendix `B' to the rules.
Rule 7 provides for the qualifications for being appointed to the Service, Rule 10 provides for the method of recruitment and Rule 12 deals with the seniority of the members in service.
For facility of reference, rules 7, 10 and 12 column 2 of Appendix-B to the rules are reproduced hereunder :-  "7.
No person shall be appointed to the Service, unless he is in possession of qualifications and experience specified in column 2 of Appendix B to these rules in the case of direct recruitment and those specified in column 3 of the said Appendix in the case of recruitment other than by direct recruitment.
10.
Recruitment to the service shall be made in the manner as specified in column 4 of Appendix B to these rules.
Note-1.
All promotions shall be made on the basis of seniority-cum-merit.
Note-2.
Recourse to direct recruitment or appointment by transfer or deputation shall be made only if suitable candidates are not available from within the service.
12.
Seniority, inter se of members of the service shall be determined by the length of their continuous service on a post in the service : Provided that where there are different cadres in the service, the seniority shall be determined separately for each cadre : Provided further that in the case of members appointed by direct recruitment the order of merit determined by the appointing authority mentioned in these rules shall not be disturbed in fixing the seniority : Provided further that in the case of two members appointed on the same date, their seniority shall be determined as follows :- (a) a member appointed by direct recruitment shall be senior to a member appointed by promotion or transfer; (b) a member appointed by promotion shall be senior to a member appointed by transfer; (c) in the case of members appointed by promotion or by transfer, seniority shall be determined according to the seniority of such members in the appointments from which they were promoted or transferred; and (d) in the case of members appointed by transfer from different cadres, their seniority shall be determined according to pay, preference being given to a member who was drawing in higher rate of pay in his previous appointment and if the rates of pay drawn are also the same, then by their length of service in those appointments and if the length of such service is also the same, an older member shall be senior to a younger member."
Column-2, Appendix-B:  Sr No.
Designation of post Academic qualifications and experience, if any, for direct recruitment Academic qualifications and experience, if any, for appointment other than by direct recruitment Method of recruitment.
1 2 3 4 5.
"2.
Executive Engineer B.Sc.
Engineering (Civil) or equivalent qualification with five years' experience on a responsible post such as Assistant Engineer BSc.
Engineering (Civil) or equivalent with a total five years' experience on a responsible post such as Assistant Engineer (i) Promotion from Sub Divisional Officer or(ii) direct recruitment; or(iii) transfer or deputation.
A perusal of the above-reproduced rules shows that no person is to be appointed to the service unless he possesses qualifications and experience specified in column 2 of Appendix-B For the purpose of appointment by promotion to the post of Executive Engineer, qualification prescribed is B.Sc.
Engineering (Civil) or equivalent with a total five years' experience on responsible post such as Assistant Engineer.
Note 1 to Rule 10 provides that promotions shall be made on the basis of seniority-cum-merit.
Rule 12 provides that inter-se seniority of the members of service shall be determined by the length of their continuous service on a post in the Service.
"Service" in Rule 2(h) has been defined as "Haryana State Agricultural Marketing Board Service".
In the Engineering Department, hierarchy is the Superintending Engineer, Executive Engineer and Sub Divisional Engineer.
Admittedly, on 1361978 when MK Garg was promoted as Executive Engineer, private respondents were not possessing prescribed experience of five years though they were degree-holders.
Under the rules, for the purpose of promotion two conditions are required to be fulfilled; (i) a person must be degree-holder in Engineering (Civil) or equivalent; and (ii) must have total five years' experience on a responsible post such as Assistant Engineer.
MK Garg though was junior to the private respondents, yet was promoted to the post of Executive Engineer by counting his ad hoc service with the P.W.D.
Public Health from March, 1973 to March, 1975 as Assistant Engineer and from 471975 to 11111976 with the Board towards five years' experience.
The Board while promoting the petitioner was well aware that he is junior to the private respondents and it was for this reason that in the promotion order, it mentioned that promotion would not confer any benefit/right to MK Garg for any purpose other than the payment of salary as Executive Engineer.
It is not the case of MK Garg or the Board that the private respondents were not found meritorious.
Private respondents being senior and there being nothing against them on record, were entitled to be considered for promotion before the case of MK Garg could be considered.
Since the private respondents did not have the experience of five years which was must as per column 2 of Appendix B for promotion to the post of Executive Engineer, they were not promoted.
By giving benefit of period of service rendered by MK Garg on ad hoc basis in the P.W.D.
Public Health and also in the Board, MK Garg was promoted on purely temporary/provisional basis.
Mr. Nijjar, counsel for MK Garg, cannot derive any benefit of rule 12 to contend that by length of his continuous service from the date of his promotion as Executive Engineer, MK Garg would rank senior to the private respondents because ad hoc or fortuitous appointment which is on temporary to stop-gap basis cannot be taken into consideration for the purpose of seniority, even if the person was qualified to hold the post on regular basis.
The Supreme Court in Ashok Gulati and others v. BS Jain and others, 1986(4) S.L.R.
1 had an opportunity to deal with such like situation.
The question involved therein was as to whether respondents therein were entitled to the period of service rendered by them as temporary Engineers on ad hoc basis in the Irrigation Branch of the Public Works Department in the State of Haryana, prior to their appointment as Assistant Engineers on regular basis for purposes of reckoning their eligibility for promotion to the post of Executive Engineer, and also for purposes of their seniority in the cadre of Assistant Engineers.
Their Lordships of the Supreme Court held "it is well-settled that an ad hoc or fortuitous appointment on a temporary or stop-gap basis cannot be taken into account for the purpose of seniority even if the appointee was qualified to hold the post on regular basis.
As such temporary tenure hardly counts for seniority in any system of service jurisprudence."
The Supreme Court in Ashok Gulati's case (supra) referred to State of Gujarat v. CG Desai and others, (1974)2 SCR 255 where the question for consideration was whether in the case of Deputy Engineers directly recruited through the Public Service Commission by competitive examination, the service, if any, rendered by them, as officiating Deputy Engineers prior to their appointment to Class-II Service i.e. during the pre-selection period, could be taken into account for purposes of their eligibility for promotion as Executive Engineers under rule 7(2) of the Bombay Engineering Service Rules, 1960 which provided for a period of 7 years' experience in Class-II Service.
The Government stand was that the service rendered by the direct recruits prior to their appointment to the Class-II Service could not be taken into account in computing their eligibility of 7 years' experience in that class of service.
The Apex Court upheld the stand of the Government.
Following observations made in CG Desai's case were noticed by the Apex Court :  "If a person, like any of the respondents, to avoid the long tortuous wait leaves his position in the "never ending" queue of temporary officiating Deputy Engineers etc. looking for promotion, and takes a short-cut through the direct channel, to Class II Service, he gives up once for all, the advantages and disadvantages that go with the channel of promotion and accepts all the handicaps and benefits which attach to the group of direct recruits.
He cannot after his direct recruitment claim the benefit of his pre-selection service and thus have the best of both the worlds.
It is well-settled that so long as the classification is reasonable and the persons falling in the same class are treated alike, there can be no question of violation of the constitutional guarantee of equal treatment."
Further observations made in CG Desai's case were :  "If the claim of the respondents to the counting of their pre- selection service is conceded, it will create serious complications in running the administration; it will result in inequality of treatment rather than in removing it.
If the pre-selection service as Officiating Deputy Engineers of direct recruits having such service, is taken into account for the purpose of promotion, it would create two classes amongst the same group and result in discrimination against those direct recruits who had no such pre-selection service to their credit."
The afore-mentioned observations in CG Desai's case and also the rule of law laid down in Ashok Gulati's case squarely cover the controversy raised in the present case.
Ad hoc service of a person cannot be counted towards his seniority.
The object behind this principle is not to allow a person to steal march over a person who was working on regular basis.
Counsel for MK Garg cannot derive any benefit from some of the observations made by Division Bench of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 13225 of 1993 (Nawal Singh etc. v. State of Haryana and others) decided on 2971994.
The Division Bench observed "an employee who works on a post whether temporary, regularly or on ad hoc basis gains experience of that post and performs the same duties and there is no reasonable justification for not counting that experience while considering that employee for further promotion where experience is an essential requisite."
In that case, petitioners therein though were eligible for being promoted, yet experience gained by them while working on ad hoc basis was not being counted because of the instructions.
Instructions were quashed being arbitrary and above-quoted observations were given in that context.
At the same time the Division Bench also observed "one can understand that ad hoc service rendered by an employee need not be counted towards his seniority as he does not have a right to hold that post but the same would be counted only when he becomes regular i.e. gets the rights to hold that post."
A Full Bench of this Court in Chambel Singh v. The State of Haryana and another, 1994(4) SCT 800 (P&H) : 1995(1) SLR 1 in the light of judgment of Apex Court in The Direct Recruit Class-II Engineering Officers' Association and others v. State of Maharashtra and others, AIR 1990 SC 1607 and State of West Bengal and others v. Aghore Nath Dey and others, 1993(2) SCT 734 (SC) : 1993(2) S.L.R.
528 and also the views expressed in the earlier judgments of the Supreme Court held that the period as an ad-hoc appointee cannot be taken into account for considering the seniority of an incumbent and it is only when such an appointment is as per rules and not by way of a stop-gap arrangement and only a procedural formality is required to be complied with that the services so rendered would be taken into account towards his seniority in the cadre.
As has been noticed, the promotion of M.K.Garg to the post of Executive Engineer was purely ad hoc and was not in accordance with rule 10 which provides promotion on the basis of seniority-cum-merit and for this reason the Department in the gradation-list has rightly placed him below the persons who were senior to him on their having been promoted to the post of Executive Engineers.
Thus, the contention that MK Garg would rank senior to the private respondents is without any merit.
10.
In Civil Writ Petition No. 2012 of 1981.
Vijay Parkash, petitioner, has made a grievance that MK Garg on the date of his initial entry into service was more than 27 years of age and, thus, was ineligible for being appointed as Sub Divisional Engineer.
The grievance is totally misconceived.
Relaxation in this regard was accorded by the Government vide its letter No. 6050- Agri.II(4)-76/22326 dated 10111976.
The Board had power to grant relaxation and therefore, I find no legal infirmity in the appointment of MK Garg.
Resultantly, both the writ petitions, Civil Writ Petitions No. 2012 of 1981 and 6067 of 1989 shall stand dismissed.
No costs.