NK Kapoor, J - Plaintiff challenged the order dated 1331979 terming it to be against Rule 1221. of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 (for short 'the Rules) and otherwise contrary to law and fact and without jurisdiction.
2.
As per averment made in the plaint, it has been stated that the plaintiff was neither served with any show cause notice nor any warning was given nor any explanation was sought for.
With these averments, it was averred that provisions contained in Rule 1221 of the Rules are contrary to Section 7 of the Rules and so the order of discharge on the ground that the plaintiff is unlikely to prove an efficient police officer could not be passed.
It was further alleged that there was no adverse report against the plaintiff which may empower the appointing authority to form an opinion regarding his unsuitability and as such the order of discharge suffers from arbitrariness and otherwise too unjust and improper.
3.
Defendants put in appearance and filed their written statement.
Objection was taken with regard to maintainability of the suit, it being time barred and further it does not give any cause of action to the plaintiff to file the present suit.
On merits, it was averred that the plaintiff was rightly discharged from the force under Rule 1221 of the Rules who was relieved from his duty on 1331979.
As regards notice, it was stated that there was no necessity to serve any show cause notice or call for plaintiff's explanation as the order of discharge causes no stigma on the plaintiff.
4.
On the pleadings of the parties, following issues were framed:  1.
Whether the orders dated 1331979, 13182/15182 are illegal, arbitrary, against law and without jurisdiction as alleged ?
OPP  2.
Whether the notice u/s 30 CPC was not valid ?
OPD  3.
Whether the plaintiff has no cause of action to file the present suit ?
OPD  4.
Whether the suit is time barred and not maintainable?
OPD  5.
Relief  Trial Court decided issue No. 1 in favour of the plaintiff.
Issues No. 2 to 4 were also decided in favour of the plaintiff.
Resultantly, the suit of the plaintiff was decreed as prayed for.
5.
This order was challenged by the defendants in appeal.
The lower appellate Court once again examined the matter on facts as well as on law.
The lower appellate Court found substance in the submission of the learned counsel for the appellant with regard to validity of order of discharge impugned on the ground that such an order having been passed within three years of service is in conformity with Rule 1221 of the Rules and it being an order simplicitor does not attach any stigma nor the same is by way of punishment and so the plaintiff has no cause of action.
For this view, the lower appellate Court examined in detail the various judicial pronouncements of this Court as well as of the apex-Court.
In view of the reversal of decision on issue No. 1 the appeal was accepted thereby dismissing the suit filed by the plaintiff.
6.
Learned counsel for the appellant has almost reiterated the arguments which were advanced before the lower appellate Court.
The matter in dispute, in fact, is covered by Full Bench decision of this court in case reported as Sher Singh v. State of Haryana and others, 1994(3) SCT 1 (P&H) : 1994(2) SLR 100.
It has been held therein that a Constable can be discharged from service under Rule 1221 of the Rules at any time within three years of enrollment in spite of the fact that there is a specific allegation which may even amount to misconduct against him.
In the present case, the order of discharge simplicitor has been passed against the plaintiff.
It attaches no stigma nor the same is by way of punishment.
This being the position, no illegality is discernible on the perusal of the judgment and decree of the lower appellate Court.
Thus, finding no merit in the appeal, the same is dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.