A L Bahri, J - Vide this order a bunch of writ petitions (CWP Nos. 725, 1520, 1521, 7944 of 1993 and 801 of 1994) are being disposed of as one of the questions raised is common in all the writ petitions.
Main judgment is prepared in C.W.P.
No. 725 of 1993.
2.
Constable Om Parkash, the petitioner, was enrolled on November 17, 1976.
In April, 1991, a charge-sheet was served upon him on the allegations that he remained absent from duty from July 21, 1990 to August 20, 1990.
It may be observed that he was suspended on January 19, 1990 and re-instated on May 27, 1990.
Annexure P 1 is copy of the charge-sheet.
Superintendent of Police ultimately dismissed the petitioner vide order Annexure P 2 passed on - July 17, 1991.
He preferred appeal-Annexure P 3 which was dismissed vide order Annexure P 4 by the Deputy Inspector General of Police.
He preferred a revision petition-Annexure P. 5 which was dismissed on April 20, 1992, vide order Annexure P 6 by the Director General of Police on November 20, 1992.
These orders are challenged in this writ petition inter alia on the ground that the misconduct of absence from duty for a spell of 50 days is not the gravest act of misconduct calling for imposition of dismissal from duty under Rule 162 of the Punjab Police Rules.
Secondly that during the period of suspension it was not the duty of the petitioner to record attendance every day at the roll call.
Such absence of the petitioner could not be termed as a misconduct to call for imposition of penalty.
3.
On notice of motion having been issued the writ petition has been contested by the respondents inter alia asserting that the penalty of dismissal imposed is in accordance with the Punjab Police Rules 162 and 1624// Rule 162 of the Punjab Police Rules as applicable in Haryana reads as under :-  ``162 - Dismissal shall be awarded only for the gravest act of mis-conduct or as the cumulative effect of continued misconduct proved in corrigibility and complete unfitness for the police service.
In making such an award regards shall be had to the length of service of the offender and his claim to pension.''
A perusal of the Rule aforesaid would show that dismissal can be ordered on proof of either of the two facts.
Firstly for gravest act of misconduct and secondly the cumulative effect of continued mis-conduct, proving incorrigibility and complete unfitness for the police force.
While passing order of dismissal on the grounds as stated above, the length of service put in has to be taken into consideration on the basis of which a claim for pension can be made.
At the outset it may be stated that even a single gravest act of misconduct can be considered sufficient for passing order of dismissal.
Rule 162 was under consideration of this Court by the Division Bench in State of Haryana v. Gurdev Singh, 1981(3) SLR 130.
A Police Officer was found drunk while on duty and it was held that it amounted to an act of gravest misconduct calling for dismissal under the Rules.
The Supreme Court in State of Punjab v. Ram Singh Ex-Constable, 1992(3) SCT 448 (SC) : AIR 1992 Supreme Court 2188, held the order of dismissal to be valid where a constable after having heavy drink was seen roaming in the market with service revolver while he was on duty.
It was held that the conduct of the constable would constitute gravest misconduct warranting dismissal from service.
In para 5 of the judgment it was observed as under :-  ``The word `misconduct' though not capable of precise definition, its reflection receive its connotation from the context, the delinquency in its performance and its effect on the discipline and the nature of the duty.
It may involve moral turpitude, it must be improper or wrong behaviour, unlawful behaviour, wilful in character, forbidden act, a transgression of established and definite rule of action or code of conduct but not mere error of judgment, carelessness or negligence in performance of the duty, the act complained of bears forbidden quality or character.
Its ambit has to be construed with reference to the subject matter and the context wherein the term occurs, regard being had to the scope of the statute and the public purpose it seeks to serve.
The police service is a disciplined service and it requires to maintain strict discipline.
Laxity in this behalf erodes discipline in the service causing serious effect in the maintenance of law and order.''
In the aforesaid decision of the Supreme Court, it was also held that there need not be plurality of acts to award dismissal.
The word ``acts'' would include singular ``act'' as well.
4.
Mere single act of absence from duty has not been considered to be the gravest act of misconduct warranting dismissal.
This precise question was before the Division Bench of this Court of which I was also a member in State of Punjab v. Parkash Chand, Constable, 1992(1) SCT 123 (P&H) : 1992(1) S.L.R.
174.
In para 9 of the judgment while making reference to several earlier decisions on the subject it was observed that a distinction has to be drawn between `misconduct' `simpliciter' and `grave misconduct'.
It was further held that the gravest act of misconduct while not being capable of being put in a strait jacket or confined to a definition must, however, relate to an action which is of the utmost gravity and grossly fragrant.
It implies a matter of the utmost seriousness.
It was also held that the Punishing Authority was required to apply mind and record a finding that the act complained of amounted to gravest act of misconduct requiring dismissal.
Relying upon the decision in State of Punjab v. Darshan Singh, 1989(1) SLJ 191, it was held that absence without leave for almost 13 months would not in the circumstances of the case amount to the gravest act of misconduct.
On behalf of the State, reliance was placed on the decision of the Division Bench of this Court in Karnail Singh v. State of Punjab and others, 1993(4) SCT 770 (P&H)(DB) : 1993(4) RSJ 448.
The order of dismissal was held to be valid where a constable remained absent from duty continuously for 5 months and 5 days and earlier he had remained repeatedly absent from duty.
The ratio of this case cannot be applied to the facts of the cases in hand as previous repeated absence was also taken into consideration.
5.
Another question for consideration is as to whether during the period of suspension if the constable absents from roll call, could it be treated as misconduct ?
The Division Bench of this Court in Ex HC Munshi Ram v. The State of Haryana and others, 1991(2) RSJ 345, of which I was a member, held that a Constable who had been suspended was not required to record his attendance daily at the parade.
For his absence during the period of suspension, he could not be charge-sheeted.
Total absence of Munshi Ram was of 174 days and after excluding the period of suspension the absence remained of 46 days and thus the matter was remitted to the authorities to pass appropriate order on that account while quashing the order of dismissal.
6.
It may be observed that while deciding aforesaid case, reliance was placed on Ramesh Chander Chug, Assistant Engineer (Civil) v. The Haryana State Electricity Board, 1986(3) SLR 1 wherein it was held as under :-  ``An order of suspension of a government servant, does not put an end to his service under the Government.
He continues to be a member of the Service in spite of order of suspension.
The real effect of the order of suspension is that though he continues to be a member of the government service he is not permitted to work and further during the period of his suspension he is paid some allowance called subsistence allowance, which is normally less than his salary instead of the pay and allowance, he would have been entitled to it if he had not been suspended.''
It was further held:  ``After the suspension of the relationship of master and servant, the suspended employee cannot be asked to perform any official duties or to appear in and attend any office daily.
If such an officer is required to be present in the office, it will amount to issue orders to him and asking to perform certain duties which will not be permissible during the period of suspension.''
7.
Additional Advocate General appearing on behalf of the State has referred to Rule 16.4 which requires attendance of suspended police employee to attend the parade daily.
He has argued that the special rule under the Police Rules would prevail upon the general service rules on the subject of suspension of the employees and when the special rule contemplates presence of the suspended constable at daily parades, his absence would amount to mis-conduct.
This contention cannot be accepted.
In Munshi Ram v. State of Haryana and others, 1991(2) RSJ 345 (supra), it was held that a suspended police officer was not required to attend daily parades.
The general principle is that though relationship of master and servant does not cease on passing an order of suspension.
However, since only subsistence allowance is paid during the period of suspension, no work or duty can be taken from such a person.
Agreeing with the aforesaid decision, we are of the opinion that when a constable is suspended, he cannot be asked to attend daily parade as it would amount to taking duty.
It is immaterial whether he is asked to attend the parade or asked to remain in the police lines.
If duty is to be taken then he is to be paid the entire salary which is not contemplated in case of a suspended constable.
8.
In the present case, if the period of suspension is excluded from the alleged period of absence, only 30 days absence would be there and it is the Punishing Authority who is to keep in view such absence while passing the order of punishment.
It is at that stage that the question may arise as to whether the constable has explained his delay in any manner and to exonerate him from the charge and if not in spite of absence aforesaid order of dismissal would be called for or not taking into consideration the length of service put in entitling for pension.
Om Parkash petitioner, as already stated above, has already put in about 15 years of service.
9.
In C.W.P.
No. 7944 of 1993 : Raj Kumar challenges order Annexure P 1 vide which he was dismissed from service.
Appeal filed against the aforesaid order was dismissed as barred by time as communicated to him vide order Annexure P 2.
Revision Petition filed by the Director General of Police vide order dated April 19, 1993-Annexure P 4 which are challenged in this writ petition.
10.
Raj Kumar was enrolled as a Constable in 1979 and he was charge-sheeted on the ground of absence for 4 months 12 days and 3 hours from May 4, 1990 to May 16, 1990 and from May 16, 1990 to September 15, 1990.
11.
On notice of motion having been issued written statement was filed by the Superintendent of Police, Sirsa, inter alia stating that the petitioner was relieved on May 4, 1990 from Police Station Uklana district Hissar on his transfer to Police Lines, Hissar, but he did not report there.
Subsequently, on May 16, 1990, he reported and he was ordered to be transferred to District Sirsa but he did not report there till September 15, 1990.
Thus there was absence for 12 days and 3 hours on the first occasion and 4 months on the second occasion.
He was described as a habitual absentee.
He had not completed 20 years of qualifying service to claim pension.
His length of service was thus not required for taking into consideration.
No reply to the show-cause notice was submitted by the petitioner.
Since he continuously remained absence even during the enquiry, no personal hearing was required to be given to him.
Findings of the Enquiry Officer were served upon him on July 23, 1991.
No evidence in defence was produced by him to support his supposed plea of illness.
Before imposing punishment show-cause notice was given.
Taking into consideration the constant absence on the occasions mentioned above, a finding was recorded that the delinquent was proving his incorrigibility and complete unfitness for the police.
Keeping in view the ratio of the decisions referred to above, no case for interference is made out in this case.
12.
C.W.P.
No. 1520 of 1993.
Suraj Mal v. State of Haryana and others.
Suraj Mal Constable joined Police Force in July, 1974.
He was dismissed from service on January 16, 1991 vide order Annexure P.1.
Appeal against the same was dismissed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police vide order Annexure P-2 on September 24, 1991.
Further revision was dismissed by the Director General of Police vide order Annexure P 3 dated May 26, 1992.
These orders are challenged in this writ petition.
The order of dismissal was passed on the ground of his absence from duty for 139 days 10 hours and 5 minutes.
He proceeded on casual leave for 5 days and was to report back on April 23, 1989 whereas he reported on September 9, 1989.
A regular enquiry was held against him.
During the enquiry he was proceeded ex parte after he had produced one witness in defence.
As per this witness the petitioner suffered from Typhoid and did not attend the duties.
In the written statement it was denied that during the enquiry he had produced a list of three defence witnesses including the doctor.
After examining one witness Shri Randhir Singh Sangwan, the petitioner sought adjournment for producing remaining witnesses but no such witness was produced and he did not join the proceedings.
Several adjournments were allowed, notices of which were given to the petitioner through Annexure R 3 but he did not attend the enquiry proceedings.
It is not a case of repeated absence which was not explained.
On the findings recorded, in view of the discussion above, no interference is called for.
13.
C.W.P.
No. 1521 of 1993.
Ram Pal v. State of Haryana and others.
Ram Pal Constable joined Police Force in June, 1975 and was dismissed on October 12, 1991 vide order Annexure P 1.
His appeal was dismissed vide order Annexure P 3 and the revision vide order dated December 8, 1992, (Annexure P. 5) which are challenged in this writ petition.
The allegation on the basis of which he was charge-sheeted read as under :-  ``That while he was posted at PP, CIA, in a civil dress and mis- used the Government Motor Cycle on Khewara Mor stopped the truck in the meantime.
Shri Ratan Singh DSP Sonepat reached there and enquired about stopping of the truck.
DSP was mis-guided alleging that truck has caused an accident on Bhalgarh Chowk and had come there.
The said DSP Ratan Singh made him to sit in his vehicle in order to take him to Bhalgarh Chowk but he managed to run away from the spot.
In this manner he allegedly being in civil dress under the influence of liquor and misused the Government vehicle.''
Case of the petitioner was that no evidence was produced before the Enquiry Officer that he was under the influence of liquor and the constables who were sitting with the DSP were not produced.
His plea was that he chased the truck which had caused an accident and was not under the influence of liquor when the DSP came there.
The stand taken up by the State in the written statement is as given in the charge-sheet that the petitioner was missing with the Government motor-cycle, under the influence of liquor in civil dress and stopped the truck.
DSP was misguided by him that the truck had caused an accident with the scooter.
No scooter owner was produced.
He slipped away while taking the DSP to the alleged place of occurrence.
The story put forth by the petitioner was false.
Further reference has been made to the statement of the witnesses recorded in the enquiry including that of the DSP Detailed reasoned order was passed by the Authority.
Keeping the ratio of the decisions referred to above, no interference in this case is called for.
Taking into consideration allegations levelled against the petitioner which were found to be correct that under the influence of liquor he had gone from the Police Station with the Government vehicle i.e. motor-cycle and stopped the truck unauthorisedly and misbehaved with the DSP Such an act would be gravest misconduct warranting his dismissal.
14.
C.W.P.
No. 801 of 1994.
Constable Satpal Sharma v. The State of Haryana and others  (i) Constable Satpal Sharma was enrolled on January 13, 1971.
He was dismissed from service on the ground of absence from duty vide order Annexure P 1 dated October 9, 1990.
His appeal was dismissed vide order Annexure P 3 and revision vide order October 14, 1993-Annexure P 4 which are challenged in this writ petition.
The allegation against him is that on August 16, 1989 he proceeded from Police Station Sadar Yamuna Nagar to the office of the Senior Superintendent of Police after recording entry in the Daily Diary Register at 700 am but he did not report back at his place of posting and thereafter remained absent.
On June 14, 1990 he was placed under suspension.
Summary of allegations were served upon him but in spite of that he did not join enquiry proceedings.
Statement of 5 witnesses were recorded.
A charge-sheet was framed on August 22, 1990.
Since the petitioner was not available the same was handed over to his wife Parkash Devi.
No list of witnesses was submitted.
The enquiry was concluded.
On that basis the order was passed.
The Superintendent of Police in his order Annexure P 1 recorded a finding that for more than one year the petitioner remained absent without any cause.
Thus he was incorrigible and completely unfit for police service.
(ii) In this case notice of motion was issued on January 21, 1994 and on the asking of the Court the D.A.G., Haryana, accepted notice and the case was ordered to be listed with the connected case.
No reply has been filed.
(iii) In the writ petition it is asserted that the petitioner was suffering from mental problem and on that account could not attend the duty.
The charge-sheet was supplied to the members of the family who were not taking care of the petitioner.
On such a vague allegation as above, no interference in the matter is called for.
If some plausible cause for his absence had been shown, the matter could be examined, otherwise it is a case of abandonment of duty from a police force, which is a disciplined force.
In spite of notices being sent, the petitioner chose to remain absent even from the departmental proceedings.
The Punishing Authority rightly recorded a finding that it was a case of incorrigible and unfit person for the police force.
Since he had put in 19 years of service, it was required of the Punishing Authority to take into consideration the aforesaid fact in the matter of awarding punishment.
Thus, this case has to be reconsidered by the Punishing Authority.
15.
For the reasons recorded above, the aforesaid writ petitions are disposed of as under :  (1) The Writ Petitions Nos. 725 of 1993 of Om Parkash and 801 of 1994 of Sat Pal Sharma are partly allowed with the direction to the Punishing Authority to reconsider the matter.
If the absence stands explained to his satisfaction, to exonerate and if not, to consider the question of imposing penalty taking into consideration the length of service put in, entitling them with rights to pension, to pass order of punishment.
If order of removal is passed, the order of dismissal shall stand substituted.
If the Punishing Authority decided to impose lesser punishment, the order of dismissal shall stand quashed.
(2) The Writ petitions Nos. 1520 of 1993 of Suraj Mal, 1521 of 1993 of Ram Phal and 7944 of 1993 of Raj Kumar shall stand dismissed.
There will be no order as to costs.