G S Singhvi, J - Two-fold prayers have been made by the petitioner in this petition filed by him under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
His first prayer is that a direction be issued to respondent No. 2 to give him annual increments and house rent meant for the post of Belder.
His second prayer is for the issue of a direction to respondent No. 2 for payment of salary in the pay scale of the post of Pump Operator (Driver).
Since the respondents have not chosen to file written statement, the petition will have to be decided by treating the averments made in the petition as correct.
2.
The case of the petitioner is that he was appointed as Beldar in the service of the Municipal Committee, Rohtak, on 4.10.1975 and by now he has rendered more than 19 years of service as Beldar in the service of the Municipal Committee.
The petitioner has pleaded that he was not allowed benefit of annual increments and house rent and, therefore, he filed Civil Suit No. 435 of 1987 which was decreed on 4.10.1988.
He sought execution of the decree passed by the learned Sub-Judge, Rohtak.
In the execution proceedings, he got relief in the form of annual increments and house rent till the date of the decree.
However, for the subsequent period the executing Court declined to give relief on the ground that no such direction was given in the decree.
3.
The petitioner has also stated that with effect from 141988 he was assigned the duty of Pump Operator (Driver) and since then he has been performing the work of the post of Pump Operator (Driver).
His claim is that other persons holding the posts of Pump Operators (Drivers) in the service of the Municipal Committee are being paid salary in the pay scale of Rs. 950- 1,400 but he is being paid salary in the pay scale of Beldar.
The petitioner has pleaded that on the basis of the principle of `equal pay for equal work' enshrined in Article 39(d) of the Constitution of India, he has a right to be paid salary in the pay scale of the post of Pump Operator (Driver).
I have heard Shri Hooda.
Ms. Bahri has expressed her inability to render any assistance to the Court as, according to her, the petitioner is an employee of the Municipal Committee only.
4.
On the basis of the uncontroverted averments made in the writ petition, it must be held that denial of benefit of annual grade increments and house rent to the petitioner with effect from 141988 is without any legal justification and is without any authority of law.
Annual grade increment is admissible to an employee on completion of one year's service and except in a case where the increment is withheld as a result of disciplinary proceedings taken by the employer, the employer is bound to pay annual grade increment to the employee.
Similarly, house rent allowance is admissible to an employer in accordance with his pay slab.
5.
Admittedly, the petitioner is working in the service of the Municipal Committee and, therefore, it must be held that he has a right to get increments with effect from 141988.
He has also a right to get house rent allowance with effect from 141988.
An appropriate writ deserves to be issued in favour of the petitioner directing respondent No. 2 to make payment of the aforesaid benefits to the petitioner as an employee of the Municipal Committee.
6.
However, in so far as the claim of the petitioner for grant of salary in the regular scale of Pump Operator (Driver) is concerned, I find that the pleadings of the petitioner himself are vague and sketchy.
The petitioner has not produced any order before the Court to show that he was appointed as Pump Operator (Driver).
He has also not produced before the Court any order passed by a competent authority for his posting as Pump Operator (Driver).
He has not stated as to what are his own qualifications and what are the qualifications prescribed for recruitment to the post of Pump Operator (Driver).
He has not disclosed his own seniority in the cadre of Beldars and it is not his case that he has been given the work of Pump Operator (Driver) being the senior most employee in the cadre.
Therefore, on the basis of a vague assertion that he has been made to work as a Pump Operator (Driver), the petitioner cannot legitimately claim payment of salary in the pay scale of the post of Pump Operator (Driver).
No doubt the principle of `equal pay for equal work' for men and women, which is enshrined in Article 39(d) of the Constitution of India, has been read as a part of the equality clause contained in Articles 14 and 16, while enforcing this principle the Court cannot be totally oblivious of the qualifications of a particular post and also as to whether a person has been given the duties of a higher post according to his seniority and qualifications.
At times, officials of public bodies assign duties of higher posts to junior persons ignoring the requirement of qualifications for a particular post.
Rampant favouritism and nepotism in the posting of employees on posts other than on which they are appointed has to be taken note of while making an adjudication for enforcing the principles of `equal pay for equal work'.
Unless the Court is satisfied that a person possesses requisite qualifications to hold a particular post and that he has been assigned the duties of a higher post after due consideration of the cases of the other similarly situated persons, ordinarily the Court will not issue a writ of mandamus on the basis of the principle of `equal pay for equal work'.
That is precisely the fact situation obtaining in the case of the petitioner.
Therefore, he is not entitled to a writ of mandamus for payment of salary in the pay scale of Pump Operator (Driver).
7.
Another reason for not giving this benefit to the petitioner is total absence of any representation or notice of demand for justice by the petitioner.
The petitioner has not pleaded that before the filing of this petition he had approached the authorities of the Municipal Committee and had made a request that on account of performance of duties of the post of Pump Operator (Driver) he has acquired a right to be paid salary in the pay scale of Pump Operator (Driver).
Failure of the petitioner to fulfil this requirement is another ground for declining relief to him.
In the result, the writ petition is partly allowed.
The respondent- Municipal Committee is directed to give annual grade increments to the petitioner with effect from 141988.
Similarly, the benefit of house rent allowance shall be given to the petitioner with effect from 141988.
The arrears payable to the petitioner as a consequence of implementation of this order shall be paid to him within four months of the submission of a certified copy of this order before the Municipal Committee, Rohtak.
If the payment is not made to the petitioner within this period of four months, he shall be entitled to interest at the rate of 18% per annum from the date of this order.
In that event, the Municipal Committee shall have to recover the amount of interest from the salary of the official who may be responsible for disregarding the directions given by this Court.
The petitioner shall get costs of Rs. 2,000/- from the Municipal Committee, Rohtak.