Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was working as Manager with the Canara Bank.
Vide order dated October 4, 1989, he was dismissed from service.
He filed an appeal which was rejected vide order dated June 11, 1990.
Aggrieved by these orders, the petitioner has approached this court through the present writ petition.
The enquiry proceedings as well as the orders of dismissal and rejection of appeal have been impugned on grounds of bias, violation of the principles of natural justice as well as rules.
It has also been contended that the orders of punishment are arbitrary and the doctrine of proportionality has been invoked to challenge the imposition of the punishment of dismissal.
The respondents have controverted the petitioner's claim by filing a detailed written statement.
2.
Arguments have been heard at some length.
On behalf of the petitioner, it has been contended that the action of the respondents suffers from the vice of bias and that the enquiry proceedings were totally violative of the principles of natural justice.
It has also been contended that the petitioner was not permitted to avail of the services of an officer to assist him during the enquiry proceedings and that the punishment awarded to the petitioner is disproportionate to the charges proved against him.
On behalf of the respondents, it has been contended by Mr. Aggarwal that the allegations made in the petition having been denied by the respondent-Bank, this court cannot examine the disputed questions of fact in the exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution.
According to the learned counsel, the only forum where disputed point can be settled is before a Civil Court wherein evidence can be led by the parties in support of their respective claims.
3.
In view of the objection taken on behalf of the respondent-Bank, Mr Punchhi, learned counsel for the petitioner, has submitted that the petitioner is willing to file a civil suit provided the respondents do not raise the objection of limitation.
4.
Keeping in view the totality of circumstances, it appears to be in the interest of justice to relegate the petitioner to the remedy before the Civil Court.
Further more, in view of the fact that the petitioner had filed this writ petition on Dec 20, 1990 so as to challenge the orders passed on October 4, 1989 and June 11, 1990 it is clear that he has been following the remedy without any avoidable loss of time and in view of the peculiar facts of this case, it would be in the interest of justice to allow him to resort to the remedy before the Civil Court.
As the petitioner has been pursuing the remedy before a Court of law, it would be fair to allow him to institute the suit, if so advised, within one month from today, in case he institutes the suit or before March 13, 1995, the respondent-Bank shall not be permitted to raise the plea of Limitation.
The writ petition is, accordingly, disposed of as having been withdrawn and the petitioner is relegated to his remedy before the Civil Court.
Since I have expressed no opinion on any of the point arising in this case, it is clarified that it would be open to the petitioner to raise the pleas as pleaded in this writ petition or such other pleas as may be permissible under the law.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.