GS Singhvi, J - This is the 4th petition in the series of petitions which have been filed by the petitioner in this Court for challenging the disciplinary proceedings initiated against him vide Memo dated 4.6.1981 (Annexure-1).
The petitioner had filed C.W.P.
No. 4965 of 1981 challenging the institution of departmental enquiry.
That petition was dismissed as withdrawn on 2.11.1981 with the liberty to the petitioner to file a fresh petition.
His second petition being C.W.P.
No. 2927 of 1982 was dismissed by the Court on the ground that despite observations made in the earlier order dated 2.11.1981, the petitioner did not file reply to the show cause notice.
Third petition filed by the petition being C.W.P.
No. 184 of 1983 was dismissed as withdrawn with liberty to file a fresh one.
2.
In the present petition also subject matter of challenge is the same charge-sheet (Annexure P.1), which had been assailed by him in the three earlier writ petitions.
The petitioner has tried to make out a case that the impugned charge-sheet is without jurisdiction inasmuch as the departmental authorities are not entitled to initiate disciplinary action against him in respect of orders passed by the petitioner under section 84 of the Punjab Co-operative Societies Act, 1961.
3.
At the relevant time, the petitioner was working as Assistant Registrar, Co-operative Societies, Amritsar.
While holding the post of Assistant Registrar, the petitioner was enjoying powers of the Registrar under the Act of 1961.
A dispute which arose between Sangatpura Co-operative Agricultural Society and one Harbans Singh became subject matter of arbitration under section 55 read with section 56 of 1961 Act.
Shri Deep Chand, Inspector, Co-operative Societies, Chaugawan, was appointed as Arbitrator.
The Arbitrator passed an award on 14.10.74.
Against this award Shri Harbans Singh filed an appeal which was heard and decided by the petitioner.
The petitioner modified the award in so far as it related to the award of interest to the Society.
He also reduced the amount of costs from Rs. 2000/- to Rs. 250/-.
The case of the petitioner is that the substratum of the charge levelled against him relates to the quasi-judicial order passed by him under the Act of 1961 and that in view of the provisions contained in section 84 of 1961 Act is immune from any disciplinary action.
4.
In support of the writ petition Shri Vinod Sharma argued that the order passed by the petitioner as an appellate authority under section 68 of the Act could be made subject matter of revision petition by the Society and it was not open to the departmental authorities to have initiated proceedings against him for any error or irregularity in the order passed under section 68.
His second contention is that during the pendency of the departmental enquiry, the petitioner has retired from service and against a retired Government servant departmental enquiry cannot be held.
Third argument of Shri Sharma is that the impugned order has been passed by the competent authority without application of mind.
By inviting Court's attention to Annexure P.5 Shri Sharma argued that the Government did not apply its mind while passing an order appointing the Inquiry Officer.
It did not even consider the representation filed by the petitioner as a reply to the show-cause notice.
Mrs. Charu Tuli argued that when there is a specific allegation of mala fide exercise of power by the petitioner, it cannot be said that the departmental enquiry is without jurisdiction.
She argued that quasi-judicial authorities are also not immune from disciplinary action where it is alleged that the action/order of the quasi-judicial authority suffers from mala fides or patent arbitrariness.
She relied on the decision of the Supreme Court in Union of India & others v. Shri KK Dhawan, 1993(2) SCT 86 (SC) : JT 1993(1) SC 236.
Mrs. Tuli further argued that the departmental enquiry had been initiated against the petitioner while he was in service and such an can enquiry be continued even after retirement in view of the provisions contained in Rule 22 of the Punjab Civil Service Rules, Vol. II.
She also produced the original enquiry filed before the Court to show that the Government had taken decision for appointment of Inquiry Officer after detailed examination and consideration of the representation submitted by the petitioner.
5.
Theoretically speaking, argument of Mr. Sharma that a departmental enquiry cannot be initiated against an administrative officer for the acts done by him in the discharge of his quasi-judicial functions or an order passed by him in the exercise of quasi-judicial powers is correct.
However, what Shri Sharma's argument misses is that there is no total bar against holding of an enquiry against a public servant in respect of his judicial or quasi-judicial functions.
Immunity against disciplinary action is restricted to the cases of bona fide exercise of judicial or quasi-judicial powers.
Where the exercise of powers is vitiated by mala fides or patent arbitrariness, the immunity against departmental action is not available.
This is precisely what the Supreme Court has held in Shri KK Dhawan's case (supra).
While reversing an order passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal, which had in turn quashed the departmental action initiated against the respondent, the Supreme Court held that a departmental action is permissible against an officer in regard to his work as a quasi-judicial authority or in matters where he discharged quasi-judicial functions.
Their Lordships indicated the instances where disciplinary action could be initiated against an officer even in regard to his functions as quasi-judicial authority.
The Supreme Court held :  "i) Where the officer had acted in a manner as would reflect on his reputation for integrity or good faith or devotion to duty; ii) if there is prima facie material to show recklessness or misconduct in the discharge of his duty; iii) if he has acted in a manner which is unbecoming of a Government servant; iv) if he had acted negligently or that he omitted the prescribed conditions which are essential for the exercise of the statutory powers; v) if he had acted in order to nudely favour a party; vi) if he had been actuated by corrupt motive, however, small the bribe may be, because Lord Coke said long ago 'though the bribe may be small yet the fault is great."
The instances above cataloged are not exhaustive.
However, we may add that for a mere technical violation or merely because the order is wrong and action not failing under the above enumerated instances, disciplinary action is not warranted.
Here, we may utter a word of caution.
Each case will depend upon the facts and no absolute rule can be postulated."
Thus, the first contention of the learned counsel does not merit acceptance.
6.
Equally untenable is the second argument of Shri Sharma, namely, that the departmental proceedings could not be continued after the petitioner's retirement.
Rule 22(b) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules Vol. II clearly provides for continuation of departmental proceedings even after retirement.
That rule even provides for institution of departmental enquiry against a retired Government servant.
Though power to initiate departmental action after retirement can be exercised on fulfilment of the conditions specified in Rule 22 (b) the very fact that the rule making authority has reserved a right in the employer to initiate disciplinary action after retirement of a Government employee clearly shows that proceedings initiated during the period of employment do not lapse merely because the employee has retired.
Therefore, the departmental enquiry which was initiated against the petitioner as early as in the year 1981 could legitimately be continued despite his retirement.
7.
Third submission of Shri Sharma regarding non-application of mind by the Government before it passed the order for the appointment of Inquiry Officer is without any merit.
A look at the file produced by Mrs. Tuli shows that the competent authority not only examined the representation of the petitioner but also recorded its opinion that the said representation was unsatisfactory.
Though it is true that the competent authority should indicate in the order of appointment of Inquiry Officer that the representation/reply filed in response to the show-cause notice has been considered and not found satisfactory, this omission in Annexure P.5 is not fatal to the departmental enquiry pending against the petitioner.
8.
As none of the contentions advanced by the learned counsel for the petitioner merits acceptance, the writ petition deserves to be dismissed and order accordingly.
However, taking note of the fact that the departmental enquiry has already become quite old and the petitioner stands retired from service, I direct the respondents to complete that enquiry proceedings within a period of three months.
If the enquiry proceedings are not completed within this period, the proceedings pending against him shall be deemed to have been dropped and in that event the petitioner shall be entitled to all consequential benefits.
The period of three months shall commence from the date of submission of a certified copy of this order.
The petitioner is directed to extend full cooperation to the Inquiry Officer.
In case it is found that the petitioner has not been co-operating with the conduct of the enquiry, the respondents shall be at liberty to apply for extension of time limit fixed by this Court.
Petition dismissed.