NK Kapoor, J - This order shall dispose of Regular Second Appeal No. 1702 and 1163 of 1990 as both these appeals arise out of the judgment dated March 31, 1990 passed by Additional District Judge, Rohtak.
2.
Rattan Lal Plaintiff, a mechanic in Haryana Roadways, challenged the order dated 16.4.1981 whereby Madan Lal respondent No. 2, was promoted to the post of Head Mechanic thereby superseding him.
As per facts of the case on record, Plaintiff was appointed as a Mechanic in Haryana Roadways, Rohtak Depot, on 16.5.1977 and was senior to Madan Lal respondent No. 2.
He was made regular vide order dated 1171979 w.e.f.
1111978 and thereafter was transferred to the Govt. Central Workshop at Rohtak.
Madan Lal respondent joined as a Fitter in the Govt. Central Workshop w.e.f.
12101965 and was promoted as a mechanic w.e.f.
3091977.
Since the plaintiff had been appointed as a Mechanic earlier to respondent No. 2, the promotion of respondent No. 2 as a Head Mechanic thereby ignoring his claim was stated to be wholly unjustified.
Thus, with a view to get redressal of this grievance, the Plaintiff challenged the promotion order of respondent No. 2.
3.
Defendants put in appearance, filed written statement and controverted the various material averments made by the Plaintiff.
It was specifically averred that the plaintiff was entitled to get his seniority amongst the mechanics of the Haryana Roadways whereas respondent No. 2 was working in Car Section at Chandigarh with which the plaintiff has no link or concern.
It was further pleaded that the plaintiff and defendant No. 2 belonged to different cadres and different sectors.
4.
On the pleadings of the parties, following issues were framed :  1.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to promotion as Head Mechanic and his supersession by an order dated 16.4.1981 granting promotion to Madan Lal defendant No. 2 is illegal, null and void for the reasons given in the plaint ?
OPP  2.
Whether the plaintiff was absorbed as Mechanic in the Sub Unit of Govt. Central Workshop at Rohtak and as such is not eligible to the Promotion in the general cadre of Mechanic in Haryana Roadways ?
OPD.
3.
Whether the civil Court has no jurisdiction to hear and decide the matter ?
OPD.
4.
Whether the suit is time barred ?
OPD.
5.
Whether the suit is not maintainable in the present form ?
OPD  6.
Whether the plaintiff has no cause of action ?
OPD.
7.
Relief.
The trial Court decided issue No. 1 against the plaintiff holding that the Plaintiff having exercised his option as per Exhibit D-1 has no cause to challenge the same.
Issue No. 2 was decided in favour of the defendants.
Under issue No. 3, it was held that civil Court at Rohtak had no jurisdiction to try the suit.
Issue No. 4 too was decided against the plaintiff holding that the same is not within limitation.
5.
Before the lower appellate Court, correctness of the decision of the trial Court was assailed.
The lower appellate Court once again examined the whole matter in the light of evidence led as well as the legal proportion and so chose to reverse the finding of the trial Court under all contentious issues and thus decreed the suit of the Plaintiff as prayed for.
6.
Before me, almost identical pleas have been raised by the learned counsel for the appellant which somehow did not find favour with the appellate Court and for a justifiable reason.
Broad facts as noticed in the earlier part of the judgment are not in dispute.
Admittedly, Rattan Lal Plaintiff was appointed as a Mechanic vide order dated 16.5.1977 whereas defendant No. 2 joined as a Fitter in the Govt. Central Workshop on 12101965.
He was promoted as a Mechanic w.e.f.
3091977.
Thus as a mechanic he was promoted after the appointment of the plaintiff on 16.5.1977.
Plaintiff's claim was denied on two counts (i) Employees working in the Government Central Workshop and Haryana Roadways belonged to two different and separate cadres; and (ii) Plaintiff exercised his option on 1631981 and so disentitles him to the relief.
The case as set up by the plaintiff is that these two branches are of the same department and since the employees are liable to be transferred from Haryana Roadways Rohtak Depot to Govt. Central Workshop, Rohtak, a joint seniority list is to be maintained in this regard and the service rendered in one department is to be counted for the purpose of seniority and other benefits.
Examined thus, the plaintiff having joined earlier to the contesting defendant had a legitimate claim to be promoted as a Head Mechanic and his claim could not be refused on the basis of an alleged option exercised by him in document Exhibit D-1.
The Plaintiff who had been working with the Haryana Roadways Rohtak Depot was transferred vide order dated 381979 Exhibit PX/5 to Govt. Central Workshop Sub Unit, Rohtak.
This order nowhere records whether the transfer is from one department to the other.
It also does not record that this will be treated as a fresh appointment for the purpose of seniority or that the person will lose his claim for seniority on the basis of previous service.
In the absence of any rules or standing orders providing for maintaining a separate seniority fist for employees working in Haryana Roadways and the Govt. Central Workshop and its sub units, it is reasonable to infer that the employee so transferred would retain his claim on the basis of length of service rendered in the other department.
This conclusion of the lower appellant Court does not call for any interference.
7 It has been next contended that the plaintiff having exercised his option vide Exhibit D-1 could not challenge the promotion of defendant No. 2.
The so-called option Exhibit D-1 is dated 1631981.
In the present case, Plaintiff was transferred vide order dated 3819179 Exhibit PX/5 i.e. to say till then he had not given up his claim i.e. benefit of previous service for the purpose of seniority etc.
Even in the so-called undertaking, there is not reference that the plaintiff would not claim the benefit of his previous service for the purpose of seniority and promotion.
Thus, this objection to pales into insignificance.
8.
No other point has been pressed by the counsel for the appellant.
Thus, I find no merit in these appeals and consequently dismiss the same thereby upholding the judgment and decree of the Additional District Judge.
No order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.