GS Singhvi, J - Petitioner has questioned the legality of the order of punishment dated 1.10.1990 issued by the Director, Food and Supplies, Punjab.
He also questioned the order passed by the appellate authority on April 30, 1991 partly allowing his appeal against the order of punishment.
2.
Facts of the case are that while the petitioner was holding the post of Assistant Food and Supplies Officer, Jalandhar when he was served with charge-sheet Annexure P/1 dated 5101986 for initiation of a departmental inquiry under rule 8 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970.
The petitioner submitted a reply to the charge-sheet and then the inquiry was entrusted to Deputy Director (Fields)-cum-Inquiry Officer.
A detailed inquiry was held by the Inquiry Officer.
In this report dated December 30, 1988 (Annexure P/2), the Inquiry Officer recorded a finding that charges levelled against the petitioner have not been proved.
Thereafter the disciplinary authority called upon the petitioner for personal hearing.
Shri Rajesh Chhabra the then Director, Food and Supplies, Government of Punjab gave personal hearing to the petitioner, However, before Shri Chhabra could pass order, he was transferred.
His successor-in-office Mrs. Romila Dubey finally passed the order of punishment on 1.10.1990 and inflicted a penalty of stoppage of three annual increments with cumulative effect on the petitioner.
Petitioner appealed against the order of punishment by filing an appeal under rule 15 of the Rules, 1970 and he was partly successful in persuading the appellate authority inasmuch as the appellate authority reduced the penalty of punishment of stoppage of three annual increments without cumulative effect to stoppage of two increments without cumulative effect.
The petitioner filed review petition before the Secretary, Food and Supplies Department and this petition of the petitioner has been dismissed as is evident from communication Annexure P/8.
3.
Petitioner has challenged the legality of order passed by the Punishing Authority on various grounds set out in the writ petition.
His plea is that the punishing authority has travelled beyond the scope of charge-sheet in recording the finding of guilt against the petitioner.
Another plea of the petitioner is that the punishing authority has not recorded his conclusion on the basis of evidence adduced during the course of inquiry and instead it has proceeded on pure conjectures and surmises.
Yet another submission of the petitioners that no real opportunity of personal hearing was afforded to him by the disciplinary authority because the officer who heard him had not passed the order of punishment and the one who had passed the order of punishment had not heard him.
The last ground of challenge to the order of punishment is that the very initiation of inquiry is vitiated on account of pre- determination of the guilt of petitioner and non-application of mind by the punishing authority.
Appellate order has been assailed on the ground that the appellate authority has also travelled beyond the scope of the charges and has recorded findings adverse to the petitioner without affording him any opportunity of hearing.
The petitioner has also questioned the action initiated against him on the ground that one BC Kashyap, Inspector of the department was awarded similar punishment but the appellate authority quashed the order of punishment vide order dated 2061991 and although his case was more or less identical to that of Mr. BC Kashyap, the punishment awarded to him has been sustained by the appellate authority with slight modification.
4 First and the foremost argument advanced by learned counsel for the petitioner is that the order of punishment is vitiated on account of patent violation of the rule of natural justice namely audi alterm partem.
The submission is that the disciplinary authority/punishing authority had not afforded the real opportunity of hearing to him because the person who ultimately passed the order of punishment had not heard him.
Shri CM Chopra argued that Shri Rajesh Chhabra who had heard the petitioner in response to the notice is sued by him did not pass the order of punishment because he stood transferred and that his successor-in-office Smt. Romila Dubey did not give any opportunity of personal hearing to the petitioner.
Learned Asstt.
Advocate General appearing for the respondents submitted that under the rules there is no provision for giving two personal hearings, to a delinquent before the disciplinary authority passed an order of punishment and, therefore, even if Smt. Romila Dubey did not hear the petitioner personally, the impugned order cannot be negatived on account of violation of rules of natural justice.
In my opinion, the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner merits acceptance.
A perusal of the report submitted by the Inquiry Officer shows that after considering the evidence produced by the department, the Inquiry Officer recorded a categorical findings that the charges levelled against the petitioner have not been proved.
If the disciplinary authority had accepted the report of the Inquiry Officer, that would have naturally resulted in exoneration of the petitioner.
In that eventuality the petitioner could have made no grievance with the finding recorded by the Inquiry Officer or the action taken by the disciplinary authority.
However, that did not happen.
Apparently the disciplinary authority disagreed with the inquiry report.
For this reason it called upon the petitioner to appear for personal hearing.
The petitioner was heard by Shri Rajesh Chhabra.
If Shri Chhabra has passed the order of the punishment, perhaps no exception could have been taken by the petitioner on the ground of violation of rules of natural justice.
However, instead of Mr. Chhabra his successor-in-office made the order of punishment and that Officer namely Smt. Romila Dubey did not hear the petitioner.
Once the disciplinary authority decided to comply with the rule of natural justice, it was not open to it to go back from it, and it was not open to the successor-in-office of Shri Chhabra to have ignored the rules of natural justice and to pass the order of punishment without giving a personal hearing to the petitioner.
Even in the absence of rules, it is an obligation on the quasi-judicial authority to comply with the minimum requirement of principles of natural justice.
Therefore, before the disciplinary authority could rely on its disagreement with the report of Inquiry Officer and pass an order adverse to the petitioner, it was necessary for it to hear the petitioner.
Only an effective and real opportunity of hearing could have enabled the petitioner to convince the disciplinary authority, who made the order of punishment, that the finding recorded by the Inquiry Officer was correct.
Thus in passing the order of punishment without giving a personal hearing to the petitioner, the disciplinary authority will be deemed to have violated the principles of natural justice and on that ground its order is liable to be declared as void.
Another submission advanced by learned counsel for the petitioner, which too merits acceptance is that the disciplinary authority has punished the petitioner before the charged levelled against him.
A look at the charge-sheet Annexure P/1 shows that the petitioner was charged with the allegations of carelessness, irresponsibilities and not being trust-worthy.
These allegations were levelled against the petitioner in the context of the fact that the petitioner had recommended the grant of licences to M/s Sehgal Sales, Phillaur, Punjab Coal Traders, Phillaur, Mehra Sales, Phillaur and Surinder Coal Traders, Phillaur without making proper physical verification.
In the statement of allegations, it has been recorded that the Deputy Director (Fields), Jalandhar had found that Mehra Sales, Phillaur and Surinder Coal Traders, Phillaur were benami parties.
While the Inquiry Officer recorded his specific finding that all the four parties in whose favour recommendations were made by the petitioner were not benami, the disciplinary authority recorded that it was not agreeing with the report of the Inquiry Officer because the delinquent had not produced any proof to show that after obtaining licences, the four parties had done right work.
The disciplinary authority has also recorded that no proof of fortnightly or monthly coal distribution returns were produced and therefore, these four parties have not done properly coal business after receiving coal licences and it indicates the involvement of the petitioner.
A comprehensive reading of order of punishment shows that the disciplinary authority had nowhere found any infirmity in the report of physical verification or recommendation made by the petitioner.
It has not recorded a conclusion that the petitioner had submitted fake report or that his action in making recommendations in favour of the four parties suffered from lack of bona fide.
May be that after grant of licences to these four parties, all of them or any one of them, may have not done their business properly, but for that, the petitioner could hardly be blamed.
Above all, failure of the parties to submit fortnightly or monthly coal distribution returns could not lead to an inference that the petitioner was involved with the parties in any manner.
Clearly the disciplinary authority has travelled beyond the scope of charges in recording a conclusion that the petitioner was involved with the parties.
No such allegation was levelled against the petitioner namely that he was involved with the parties.
In the absence of such allegation having been levelled against the petitioner, he had no opportunity to meet that allegation.
It is right to say that no man can be condemned unheard.
5.
In Sur Enamel and Stampling Works Ltd v. Workmen, AIR 1963 SC 1914, their Lordships of the Supreme Court held that an enquiry cannot be said to have been properly held unless (i) the employee proceeded against which has been informed clearly of the charges levelled against him, (ii) the witnesses are examined, ordinarily in the presence of the employee in respect of the charge, (iii) the employee is given a fair opportunity to cross-examine the witnesses, (iv) he is given a fair opportunity to examine witnesses including himself in his defence if he so wishes on any relevant matter, (v) Enquiry Officer records his findings with reasons for the same in his report.
In that particular case the Court found that the charge being for causing damage to property and the enquiry officer's report being in respect of the same, the dismissal order was made for something else and that itself would be a sufficient ground for setting aside the order of dismissal.
6.
In State of Punjab v. Bakhtawar Singh, AIR 1972 SC 2083, the Court found that a member of the State Electricity Board was removed for a charge which was not levelled against him.
The Court found that the Minister had not found the member guilty of any of the charges levelled against him.
On the other hand two other reasons were given for removing the member from office.
The Court observed as under :  "It may be noted that Shri Bakhtawar Singh has not charged with having not discharged his duties impartially.
None of the charges levelled against him accused him of not discharging his duties impartially.
Hence the Minister was not justified in taking into consideration a charge in respect of which the member was not given any opportunity to explain his position."
7.
In Virendra Kumar v. Chief of the Army Staff, 1982(2) SCC 1276, their Lordships of the Supreme Court found that the appellant was called upon to show cause as to why his licence should be cancelled for withholding certain information at the time of his admission to the Bar.
He was absolved of that charge.
The Bar Council was, therefore, not correct in removing him from the role on a charge which he was not asked to defend namely that he had been restored to Government service.
The action of the Bar Council was declared as bad on the ground of violation of principles of natural justice.
8.
In Annamunthodo v. Oil Fields Workers Trade Union, 1961(3) All E.R.
621, the Privy Council found that the appellant's expulsion from the respondent trade Union was vitiated because the rule under which he was expelled created a separate and distinct offence with which he has not been charged and even if that rule did not create a separate offence and merely imposed severe penalties when the conduct was prejudicial to the interest of the Union, the rule should not have been invoked without giving the appellant notice of it, Lord Denning speaking for the Bench observed as under :  "The first question is : Did Rule 11(7) create a separate and distinct offence of "conduct prejudicial to the interests of the union" ?
- for in that case it ought to have been separately charged or did Rule 11(7) merely empower the general council to impose more severe penalties for the various other offences specified in the rules, provided that the conduct of which he was convicted under them was prejudicial to the interests of the union ?
- for in that case Rule 11(7), so it was said, need not be separately charged, but only the others offences PHILLIPS, J, in the Supreme Court and ARCHER AND RENNIE, JJ, in the Federal Supreme Court (2) though that Rule 11(7) only empowered the general council to impose more severe penalties and sought support for this view from some observations of Eve.
J, in Wolstenholme v. Amalgamated Musicians" Union(3).
But Wylie J, though it created a separate and distinct offence, and their Lordship agree with him.
As he said (4)  "It stands entirely on its own, authorising expulsion of a member who is proved to the satisfaction of the general council to have been guilty of conduct prejudicial to the interests of the Union."
In the opinion of their Lordships, it should not have been invoked for the purpose of expelling the appellant unless he was given notice of the charge under it and had a fair opportunity of meeting it.
But even if r11(7) only empowered more severe penalties, nevertheless those severe penalties could only be imposed when the conduct was prejudicial to interest of the respondent Union; and their Lordships think that even on that view, the rule should not have been invoked without giving the appellant notice of it.
Counsel for the respondent-union sought to treat the specific formulation of charges as immaterial.
The substance of the matter lay, he said, in the facts alleged in the letter as to the meeting which the appellant had attended and the allegations he had made.
Their Lordships cannot accede to this view.
If a domestic tribunal formulates specific charges, which lead only to a fine, it cannot without notice resort to other charges which, lead to far more severe penalties."
9.
It is clear from the above noted cases that an employee, cannot be punished for a charge which is not levelled against him.
Employer's action of punishing an employee in respect of the charge which is not levelled against him results in breach of the principles of natural justice and it has the effect of rendering the order passed by the employer, is nullity.
It is an elementary rule of natural justice that a man whose civil rights are giving to be affected by an action of a public authority he must know the basis or which the action is being taken against him and must have an opportunity himself.
Unless specific charge of misconduct is levelled, the employee cannot be penalised.
He cannot be punished for a charge which is not made subject matter of enquiry.
10.
This principle directly applies in cases of disciplinary proceedings where a person if punished for a charge which is not subject matter of the inquiry and in respect of which the delinquent does not get an opportunity of defending himself.
11.
One more serious infirmity with which the impugned order suffers is that the disciplinary authority has violated yet another basic rule of natural justice.
A careful reading of the order of punishment shows that the disciplinary authority has held the petitioner guilty only because the petitioner could not produce any witness or documentary proof to show that the four parties had done right work after obtaining licences.
Burden to prove the charges in a domestic inquiry always lies on the employer unless the delinquent employee admits the charge.
There is no presumption of guilt against the employee and therefore unless the employer leads evidence to establish the charge, the delinquent is not required to lead any evidence in his defence.
Mere failure of the delinquent to lead evidence in defence cannot be a ground for holding him guilty unless the employer/disciplinary authority produces positive evidence to establish the charge.
This principle of law has been laid down by Supreme Court in Delhi Cloth and General Mills Limited v. Ludh Budh Singh, A.I.R. 1972 SC 1031.
Hence the disciplinary authority has held the petitioner responsible for the allegation levelled against him on the ground that he has not produced any evidence in support of his defence.
For this reason the impugned order of punishment is liable to be set aside.
12.
In so far as the appellate order is concerned, learned counsel for the petitioner is right in arguing that the appellate authority has also travelled beyond the scope of the charge.
In fact the appellate authority has recorded its findings on pure conjecture and surmises.
The appellate authority has observed that if a proper inquiry had been made about the genuineness of the parties, perhaps the petitioner would have not made recommendation for the grant of licences to them.
Allegation levelled against the petitioner does not speak of lack of bona fide on his part in making of inquiry.
In fact the allegation levelled against him was that he had not make proper physical verification before making recommendations.
Mere failure of the parties to lift the allocated coal or properly doing the business of distribution of coal cannot automatically lead to an inference that the petitioner was careless or negligent in making recommendation for grant of licences or that he was in any way involved with the parties.
Above all the appellate authority has itself come to a conclusion that there was no evidence to indicate that the petitioner had recommended the names of four parties for the grant of licences without proper inquiries about them, Another reason for not upholding the order of appellate authority is that it has merely affirmed the order passed by the punishing authority and once I have found that the order passed by the punishing authority is bad for violation of principles for natural justice, the order passed by the appellate authority is also liable to be declared illegal.
For the reasons aforesaid, the writ petition succeeds and it is hereby allowed.
Orders Annexure P/3 and P/5 are declared illegal are hereby quashed.
The petitioner shall get all consequential benefits.
Petition allowed.