V K Bali, J - The State of Punjab, being aggrieved of the Award, Annexure P-17, rendered by the Labour Court on May 30, 1991 reinstating respondent- workman with continuity of service and full back wages, has challenged the same on a solitary but solid ground that the workman could not ask for a second reference having withdrawn his list when the same was pending before the Labour Court when the Government had made first reference.
2.
Brief facts of the case reveal that the services of respondent-workman were terminated on June 1, 1982.
When the reconciliation proceedings in consequence of his demand notice failed, the government made a reference under Section 10(1)(c) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 to the Labour Court for adjudication of his cause.
However, vide his statement made on that behalf, workman withdrew his case before the Labour Court on October 11, 1984.
The Labour Court vide its Award dated October 11, 1984 itself dismissed the reference on the statement was not an industry as per the judgment of the Supreme Court, he would not like to pursue his reference and would seek his remedy in an appropriate forum.
3.
The workman has filed written statement but the fact that he had withdrawn his first reference, has not been denied.
It is, however, his case that once by subsequent judgments the petitioner-management was held to be an industry, he was well within his right to ask for second reference.
4.
After hearing learned counsel appearing for the petitioner-management and going through the records of the case, I am of the considered view that the point raised by the Assistant Advocate General, Punjab, appearing on behalf of petitioner is well merited and, therefore, this petition must succeed.
Having withdrawn his first reference without seeking permission of the Court to seek a fresh reference on the same cause of action, second reference was barred by the general principles of res judicata.
That apart, if such course is permitted, then there will be no end of litigation and old and stale matters would be raised time and again.
The facts of this very case reflect that the first reference was made by the Government way back in the year 1982 whereas the second reference, which culminated into the impugned award, Annexure P-17, was made in the year 1989.
A period of more than six years had gone by and yet the management has been burdened with full back wages to be paid to the workman.
This course if permitted, would cause irreparable loss to a party against whom such course has been permitted.
5.
For the reasons recorded above, this petition succeeds and impugned Award (Annexure P-17) is quashed.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.