Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - (Oral) The petitioner, a Co-operative Agricultural Service Society, is aggrieved by the award of the Labour Court.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
On September 1, 1984, the petitioner-Society recorded a resolution, a copy of which has been produced on record as Annexure P-2.
It was mentioned that "Nand Singh Chowkidar is always absent from his duty the President of the Society is authorised to suspend Nand Singh Chowkidar for his remaining absent from duty.
Further proceeding in this regard will be conducted by a committee of five members which will give its report within a period of one month and will submit the enquiry to the society for further action---------."
Thereafter, on October 10, 1984, the petitioner resolved that "Shri Nand Singh Chowkidar was suspended on 1984.
On 7984, he was given the charge-sheet, a reply to which was required to be given within a period of one month by him.
But he had not given any reply upto 10101984.
Therefore, he is dismissed from the services of the society.
(Services are being terminated).
This is unanimously resolved and accepted."
Aggrieved by this action, the petitioner served a notice of demand.
The matter was referred to the Labour Court.
The workman filed a Statement of Claim.
After examining the evidence, the Labour Court recorded a finding of fact that "no notice was served on the workman and no enquiry whatsoever was conducted against the workman..." As a result, it ordered the reinstatement of the workman with continuity of service and full back wages.
Aggrieved by this award, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
3.
Mr. BS Shant, learned counsel for the petitioner has raised a two-fold contention.
Firstly, it has been submitted that the workman having remained absent from duty, the action of the petitioner in dismissing him from service was, absolutely legal and valid and that the labour Court has erred in ordering his reinstatement.
Secondly, it has been contended that respondent No. 3 was one of the constituents of the petitioner-Society and that the liability of the petitioner has to be shared by the said respondent as well.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner has been controverted by Mr. Sarjit Singh, learned counsel for the workman.
4.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and perusing the record, I find that no charge-sheet was served on respondent No. 1.
In fact, Mr. Karamjit Singh, Secretary of the petitioner Society who appeared as a witness before the Labour Court categorically stated that the notice (Ex. M-1), a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-2 with the writ petition and the resolution (Ex. M-2) a copy of which has been produced as Annexure, P-3, were served on the workman.
It has nowhere been stated by him that any charge sheet was served on the workman.
The workman has appeared as a witness.
He had categorically denied the suggestion that the charge-sheet was served on him to explain as to why he was absent from duty.
No copy of any charge-sheet has been even produced which was alleged to have been served on the workman.
5.
In such a situation, it is apparent that the respondent-workman was dismissed from service without even informing him of the charge levelled against him.
Admittedly, no enquiry whatsoever was conducted.
Consequently, I am unable to find any infirmity in the award given by the Labour Court.
6.
Equally lacking in merit is the contention that the liability created by the award has to be apportioned between the petitioner and respondent No. 3.
Firstly, such a plea was not raised before the Labour Court.
Secondly even in the present petition, there is no prayer in that behalf.
Consequently, the contention cannot be accepted.
In view of the above, this petition is wholly lacking in merit.
It is dismissed.
In the circumstances of the case, I make no order as to costs.