Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - In this writ petition, the petitioner has prayed for quashing the award of the Labour Court dated May 15, 1982, wherein the Labour Court, on a reference by the Chief Commissioner, Chandigarh under Clause (c) of Sub Section (1) of Section 10 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, had held that the order of termination of services of workman was legal and justified.
2.
Aggrieved against the award of the Labour Court, the petitioner has filed the present writ petition.
3.
The case of the petitioner, as set up in the writ petition, is that the petitioner had to leave for Bihar because of some domestic reasons to look after the affairs of his brother who was ailing seriously.
As such he proceeded on leave by submitting his leave application.
Thereafter, the petitioner submitted another application for extension of leave upto April 30, 1978.
The same, according to the petitioner, was duly received in the office of General Manager, Chandigarh Transport Undertaking, Chandigarh, respondent No. 2.
4.
To the petitioner's great dismay, he received a communication dated February 7, 1978, copy, Annexure P2 to the writ petition from respondent No. 2 asking him to resume duty; otherwise action under the Central Civil Services (C.C.A.)
Rules, 1965, would be taken.
On receipt of this communication, the petitioner submitted detailed reply to respondent No. 2 explaining the circumstances which compelled him to proceed on leave with the permission of the General Manager, respondent No. 2 and his subsequent request for extension of leave.
5.
It is further averred in the writ petition that on the very day the leave application of the petitioner was received in the office of General Manager, respondent No. 2 as per entry No. 1422 dated March 6, 1978, the General Manager terminated the services of the petitioner for being wilfully absent from the duty.
As averred in the writ petition, when the petitioner went to the officer of respondent No. 2 to resume his duty, he was told that his services had already been terminated.
Thereafter, the petitioner made a representation to the General Manager, respondent No. 2 for allowing him to join duty in view of the circumstances narrated therein, but of no avail.
Subsequently, a Demand Notice was issued on which the dispute was referred to the Labour Court, UT Chandigarh, by the Chief Commissioner, UT Chandigarh, under Section 10(1)(c) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
6.
The challenge to the impugned award is that the order of termination is bad for the reason that it had violated the mandatory provisions of Section 25(F)(b) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
The other plea is that the petitioner should have been proceeded departmentally on account of the alleged absence.
It was also contended that it is not a case of abandonment of employment as the petitioner had proceeded on leave only after submitting his leave application.
Since the principles of natural justice have not been kept in mind by the Labour Court, as such the impugned award is liable to be quashed.
7.
The stand taken by the respondent is that the petitioner never applied for leave and he remained absent from duty without sanction of leave.
Even the petitioner failed to join the duty despite a communication in which he was asked to resume duty failing which action under the CCS(CCA) Rules would be taken.
The other plea is that the petitioner had abandoned the employment on his own and as such the order of termination is a consequence of absence from duty.
8.
I have perused the paper book and considered the submissions of the learned Counsel for the parties.
9.
On consideration of the matter, I am of the considered view that it would have been better for the respondents to have initiated departmental inquiry against the petitioner on account of the alleged absence before passing the impugned order of termination of his services.
It is settled principle of law that if any order which is of penal consequence is to be passed the delinquent official is to be afforded an opportunity to defend himself.
In the case in hand, the petitioner has taken a categoric stand that he had proceeded on leave after submitting the leave application.
On the other hand, it is an admitted case of the respondents that a communication was issued to the petitioner directing him to resume duty, failing which he would be liable for action under the CCS(CCA) Rules.
Even if the authority has decided to take disciplinary action against the delinquent employee, the requirement of law is that the delinquent employee should be afforded and opportunity of being heard.
10.
It is well settled principle of law that the delinquent official cannot be relieved from service without giving any opportunity to show cause.
Admittedly, in the present case, no show cause notice was given to the petitioner, nor any inquiry was held and no charge-sheet was served upon the petitioner.
As such, the impugned order is bad in law being violative of principles of natural justice.
Moreso, the approach of the Labour Court is not based on any rationale.
As such the award of the Labour Court dated May 15, 1982 deserves to be quashed.
For the foregoing reasons, the award dated May 15, 1982, copy Annexure P.7 is quashed.
The workman is to be reinstated with all consequential benefits.
No costs.