SK Jain, J. (Oral) - Amar Nath Bansal was initially appointed as a civilian clerk in the Army at Sangrur in the erstwhile Jind State on July 12, 1943.
On the merger of the Jind State in the erstwhile State of Pepsu, he was integrated as an auditor in the Treasury.
Subsequently, the post of Auditor and Assistant were equated.
He continued to function as an auditor in the Treasury even after the merger of Pepsu State with Punjab State.
On the eve of reorganisation of the State of Punjab on November 1, 1966, he was allocated to the State of Haryana.
Subsequently, he was promoted as an Assistant Superintendent with effect from September 4, 1967 in the Haryana State.
He functioned as Assistant Treasury Officer w.e.f.
October 10, 1975 and was posted at Jhajjar, Amar Nath Bansal retired as Assistant Treasury Officer from the Haryana Government on attaining the age of 58 years on September 30, 1984 as per service rules applicable to the employees of the State of Haryana.
2.
Shri Amar Nath Bansal filed civil suit No. 392 on September 25, 1987 in the Court of Sub Judge IInd Class, Rohtak, against his retirement on the plea that according to the conditions of the service applicable to the employees of the erstwhile princely State of Jind.
These Rules were protected under the covenant framed at the time of the merger of the said State with Pepsu; State Organisation Act, 1956; and Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966.
He was to continue in service upto the age of 62 years.
The said civil suit filed by Amar Nath Bansal was dismissed with costs vide judgment and decree dated January 7, 1989 passed by Shri Jagbir Singh Dahiya, Sub Judge IInd Class, Rohtak.
The plaintiff filed an appeal in the Court of Additional District Judge, Rohtak, against the above said judgment and decree of the Sub Judge IInd Class, Rohtak.
3.
The Additional District Judge IV, Rohtak, (Shri VS Malik) vide his judgment and decree of March 10, 1990 accepted the appeal of Shri Bansal, set aside the judgment and decree of January 7, 1989 of the Sub Judge IInd Class, Rohtak, and accepted the appeal and decreed the suit.
4.
Feeling aggrieved, the State of Haryana has preferred this Regular Second Appeal before this Court against the said judgment of the Additional District Judge IV, Rohtak.
5.
I have heard the learned District Attorney, Haryana, Mr. NS Bhinder, on behalf of the State and Shri Amarjeet Markan, learned counsel for the plaintiff-respondent.
6.
Exhibit P-1 is the copy of the Jind State Civil Services Rules 1945.
According to Regulation No. 27, thereof, the age of superannuation of the Officers of the Ist grade and 2nd grade and other State services was 62 years.
Admittedly, the respondent was employed as a civilian Clerk in the erstwhile State of Jind on July 12, 1943 and these Services Rules were applicable to him.
In the State of Punjab v. Kailash Nath, 1989(1) SLR 12 (SC) : AIR 1989 (SC) 558 : 1989(1) R.C.R.
(Criminal) 139, it has been held by the Supreme Court of India as under :-  "In the normal course what falls within the purview of the term `conditions of service' may be classified as salary or wages including subsistence allowance during suspension, the periodical allowance during suspension, the periodical increments, pay scale, leave, Provident Fund, Gratuity, Confirmation, promotion, seniority, tenure or termination of service, compulsory or premature retirement, superannuation, pension, changing of the age of superannuation, deputation and disciplinary proceedings."
(emphasis supplied).
7.
In view of the above said judgment of the Supreme Court there should be no hesitation in concluding that change in the age of superannuation is certainly a condition of service.
8.
The question doing rounds right now is as to whether in the circumstances of this case, this condition of service could be changed, and if at all, it could be changed, what procedure should have been followed.
9.
Exhibit P-2 is the copy of the convenant framed at the time of merger of the princely State of Jind in Pepsu State.
Article XVI of the said covenant reads as under :-  (1) The Union hereby guarantees either the continuance in service of the permanent members of the Public services of each of the Covenating States on conditions which will not less advantageous than those on which they were serving on the Ist of February, 1948 or the payment of reasonable compensation or retirement on proportionate pension.
(2) The Union further guarantees the continuance of pensions and leave salaries sanctioned by competent authorities in any of the Covenanting States to members of the public service of the state which (sic) proceeded on leave preparatory to retirement, and the compassionate allowances granted to dependents of deceased member of those services, before the date on which the administration of that State is handed over to the Raj Pramukh."
10.
It is also expedient to examine the provisions of Sections 115 and 116 of the State Reorganisation Act, 1956 and Section 82(6) of the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966.
Both these provisions are reproduced below for ready reference :-  Section 115 of the State Reorganisation Act, 1956.
115.
Provisions relating to other services - (1) Every person who immediately before the appointed day is serving in connection with the affairs of the Union under the administrative control of the Lieutenant - Governor or Chief Commissioner in any of the existing State of Ajmer, Bhopal, Coorg, Kutoh and Vindhya Pradesh, or is serving in connection with the affairs of any of the existing States of Mysore, Punjab, Patiala and East Punjab States Union and Saurashtra shall, as from that day, be deemed to have been allotted to serve in connection with the affairs of the successor State to the existing State.
(2) Every person, who, immediately before the appointed day, is serving in connection with the affairs of an existing State part of whose territories is transferred to another State by the provisions of Part II shall, as from that day, provisionally continue to serve in connection with the affairs of the principal successor State to that existing State, unless he is required by general or special order of the Central Government the Central Government to serve provisionally in connection with the affairs of any other successor State.
(3) As Soon as may be after the appointed day, the Central Government shall, by general or special order, determine the successor State to which every person referred to in sub-section (2) shall be finally allotted for service and the date with effect from which such allotment shall be taken effect or be deemed to have taken effect.
(4) Every person who is finally allotted under the provisions of sub-section (3) to a successor State shall, if he is not already serving therein be made available for serving in that successor State from such date as may be agreed upon between the Governments concerned, and in default of such agreement, as may be determined by the Central Government.
(5) The Central Government may by order establish one or more Advisory Committees for the purpose of assisting it in regard to :- (a) the division and integration of the services among the new States and the States of Andhra Pradesh and Madras; and (b) The ensuring of fair and equitable treatment to all persons affected by the provisions of this section and the proper consideration of any representations made by such persons.
(6) The foregoing provisions of this section shall not apply in relation to any person to whom the provisions of Section 14, apply.
(7) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect after the appointed day the operation of the provisions of Chapter I of Part XIV of the Constitution in relation to the determination of the conditions of service of persons serving in connections with the affairs of the Union or any State : Provided that the conditions of service applicable immediately before the appointed day to the case of any person referred to in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall not be varied to his disadvantages except with the previous approval of the Central Government.
116.
Provisions as to continuance of officers in the same posts - (1) Every person who immediately before the appointed day is holding or discharging the duties of the Union or of an existing State in any area which on that day falls within another existing State or a new a State or a `Union Territory) shall, except where by virtue or in consequence of the provisions of this Act such post or office ceases to exist on that day, continue to hold the same post or office in the other existing State of new a State or (Union Territory) in which such area is included on that day, and shall be deemed as from that day to have been duly appointed to such post or office by the Government of, or other appropriate authority in, such State, or by the Central Government or other appropriate authority in such (Union territory), as the case may be.
(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent a competent authority after the appointed day, from passing in relation to any such person any order affecting his continuance in such post or office.
(a) The word and letter "Part A" were committed by IAL, 1956 (1-11-1956).
(b) Substituted for the words "Part C State" ibid.
Section 82 of the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1956 82.
Provisions relating to other services - (1) Every person who immediately before the appointed day is serving in connection with the affairs of the existing State of Punjab shall, on and from that day, provisionally continue to serve in connection with the affairs of the State of Punjab unless he is required, by general or special order of the Central Government, to serve provisionally in connection with the affairs of any other successor State.
(2) As soon as may be after the appointed day the Central Government shall, by general or special order, determined the successor State to which every person referred to in sub-section (1) shall be finally allotted for service and the date with effect from which such allotment shall take effect or be deemed to have taken effect.
(3) Every person who is finally allotted under the provisions of sub-section (2) to a successor State shall, if he is not already serving therein, be made available for serving in the successor State from such date as may be agreed upon between the Governments concerned or in default of such agreement as may be determined by the Central Government.
(4) The Central Government may, by order establish one or more advisory committees for the purpose of assisting it in regard to - (a) the division and integration of the services among the successor States; and (b) the ensuring of fair and equitable treatment to all persons affected by the provisions of this section and the proper consideration of any representations made by such persons.
(5) The foregoing provisions of this section shall not apply in relation to any person to whom the provisions of section 81 apply - (6) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect on or after the appointed day the operation of the provisions of Chapter I of Part XIV of the Constitution in relation to the determination of the conditions of service of persons serving in connection with the affairs of the Union or any State : Provided that the conditions of service applicable immediately before the appointed day to the case of any person referred to in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall not be varied to his disadvantage except with the previous approval of the Central Government.
11.
Analytical examination of the abovesaid provisions shows that Section 116 of the State Reorganisation Act, 1956 provides for the continuance of officers in equivalent posts and under the proviso to Section 115(7) a guarantee is given that the conditions of service applicable immediately before the appointed day to the case of any person who is allotted to another State cannot be varied to his disadvantage except with the previous approval of the Central Government.
This protection could not be removed by the rules made by the State subsequent of November 1, 1956 unless the previous approval of the Central Government was obtained thereto.
Similarly under the proviso to Section 82(6) of the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966, a guarantee is given that the conditions of service immediately before the appointed day to the case of any person referred to in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall not be varied to his disadvantage except with the previous approval of the Central Government.
It is not the case of the Haryana State that such approval was obtained at any stage and, therefore, I am of the opinion that the learned lower appellate Court had rightly held that the respondent continued to be governed by service conditions of the princely State of Jind which governed his services when he was recruited as a civilian clerk on 1271943.
In holding the above view, I am fortified by the ratio laid down by the Supreme Court in MD Shukla v. State of Gujarat, AIR 1971 SC 117, State of Punjab v. Harbans Gaur, 1988(1) SLR 444 and Gulzara Singh v. State of Punjab, 1983 (2) SLR 469 : 1993(3) R.R.R.
247.
12.
District Attorney has argued that since the respondent had not exercised any option as to whether he wanted to be governed by the service rules of the princely State of Jind or by the Punjab Civil Services Rules, it will be deemed that he was to be governed by and since according to these rules an employee was the later rules/to retire at the age of 58 years, the respondent had rightly been retired at that age.
13.
I am unable to agree with the argument of the learned District Attorney.
The respondent was never asked to give option whether he would like to be governed by his pre-absorption Rules or by Punjab Civil Services Rules.
In the absence of anything on record to show that the petitioner was asked to give an option which he failed to exercise, the contention that the Punjab Civil Services Rules, will apply, is without any basis.
In holding the above view, I am fortified by the ratio laid down in :-  1.
Union of India v. Gobinder Singh, 1991(1) Recent Service Judgment 633 : 1991(2) S.C.T.
71; and (Punjab and Haryana) DB  2.
Jaganath v. Union of India, 1965 SLR 551 : AIR 1962 (SC) 148.
14.
As a result of the above discussion no fault can be found with the well reasoned judgment of the learned First Appellate Court dated 10.3.1990 which is impugned in the Regular Second Appeal and the same is affirmed.
15.
Consequently, there is no merit in this Regular Second Appeal and the same is hereby dismissed.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.