RK Nehru & GR Majithia, JJ.
- Raghubir Singh, an Ex-Constable of Haryana Police, has challenged the order of his dismissal from service dated February 21, 1992, passed by the Superintendent of Police, Sirsa, and the appellate order dated July 17, 1992 passed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Hisar Range, Hisar rejecting his appeal, in this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
2.
The petitioner was served with the charge-sheet dated December 10, 1991, by the Deputy Superintendent of Police (HQ) Sirsa and English translation thereof is as under :-  "I, Inder Dutt, Deputy Superintendent of Police, Sirsa (HQ) charge-sheet you, Sepoy/Const.
Raghbir Singh No. 403/SRS, that while you were posted as a Clerk/Constable in Police Station City Dabwali, you made false Report No. 6 dated 151091 at 820 AM for appearing as a witness in Court Case No. 38/88, State v. Bhagi Ram in the Court of Sh. RC Godara, CJM, Sirsa.
You also made a false report in the Roznamcha of Police Station City Dabwali that you were going to Sirsa, whereas the Superintendent of Police, Sirsa had issued VT that no person would go to Courts to give evidence, because in those days no Court work was taking place due to the strike of the Advocates.
On 16101991 at 445 pm in Police Line, Sirsa your had raised slogans of favour of Police Sangathan and against the SP/DGP/CM Haryana and the Police Line officials were instigated to co-operate with you and to enroll themselves in the unrecognised Police Sangathan.
Thereafter, you remained absent from duty for three days and on 171091, vide Report No. 22 registered at 630 am presented yourself in Police Station Dabwali.
In this way, you Const, Raghubir Singh No. 408/SRS, being a member of the disciplined police force, made a wrong report regarding appearing as a witness and disobeyed the orders of the senior officers and left for giving evidence in the Court without permission and raised slogans in favour of the unrecognised Police Sangathan and against the SP/DGP/CM Haryana and incited the members of the Police Force and have given the proof of indiscipline and carelessness."
3.
The petitioner filed written statement to the charge-sheet and, thereafter, a regular enquiry was conducted by the Deputy Superintendent of Police (Headquarters), Sirsa, against him.
The Inquiry Officer submitted his report dated January 3, 1992.
He found that the charges levelled against him stood proved.
On receipt of the enquiry report, the Superintendent of Police, Sirsa, who is the appointing authority, issued a show cause notice dated January 9, 1992 to the petitioner as to why a penalty of dismissal from service be not imposed upon him.
The petitioner filed reply to the show cause notice.
After considerating the reply, the appointing authority, on examining the entire material on record, came to the following conclusion, vide order dated February 21, 1992 :-  "I have carefully gone through the enquiry file and found the charges of lodging of false report in the daily diary, raising of slogans against the officers and in favour of the so-called Police Sangathan, inciting the police officials to participate in the activities of the so-called Police Sanganthan, active participation the Union activities and absence from duty without any leave or permission have been proved to the hilt.
Accordingly I hold the delinquent guilty of charges levelled against him.
Such gravest acts of misconduct on the part of the delinquent is proving his incorrectability and complete unfitness for the service of police department.
The delinquent is an unwilling worker.
I feel that no punishment other than dismissal from service will meet the ends of justice.
Hence I award him (Const.
Raghubir Singh No. 403/SRS) a penalty of dismissal from the service with immediate effect.
Order be booked accordingly.
A copy of this order be supplied to the delinquent free of cost against receipt."
4.
The order of the appointing authority was assailed by the petitioner in appeal before the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Hisar Range, Hisar.
The appeal was dismissed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Hisar Range, Hisar by his order dated July 17, 1992 observing thus :-  "After going through the departmental enquiry file, I am fully satisfied that the punishment awarded by Superintendent of Police, Sirsa does not deserve any interference as there is no force in the appeal and the same is rejected."
The petitioner preferred a revision petition against the appellate order to the Director General of Police, Haryana.
The order of the Director General of Police has not been placed on the record of the petition.
However, it is stated in para 13 of the writ petition that the revision petition was dismissed in the month of January 1993, but the copy of the order, passed by the Director General of Police, Haryana, has not been supplied to the petitioner.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner made the following submissions :-  (a) Rules 1624 and 1638 of the Punjab Police Rules, 19341.
Vol II, as applicable to the State of Haryana (for short, the Police Rules) have been violated; and  (b) The Punishing Authority did not take into consideration the length of service of the petitioner and his claim to pension while awarding the penalty of dismissal from service.
Rule 162.
(1) of the Police Rules reads as under :-  "Dismissal shall be awarded only for the gravest' acts of misconduct or as the cumulative effect of continued misconduct proving incorrigibility and complete unfitness for police service.
In making such an award shall be had to be length of service of the offender and his claim to pension."
After sub-rule (1) of Rule 162 of the Police Rules, the following explanation was inserted by the Punjab Police (Haryana First Amendment) Rules, 1985, published in Haryana Government, Home (Police).
Department's Gazette Notification No. G.S.R.
31/C.A.5/1861/S.2 and 7/85, dated March 21, 1985.
"Explanation - For the purpose of sub-rule (1) the following shall, inter alia, be regarded as gravest acts of misconduct in respect of a police officer, facing disciplinary action -  (i) indulging in copying or smuggling activities;  (ii) disrupting the means of transport or of communication;  (iii)_ damaging public property;  (iv) causing indiscipline amongst fellow policemen;  (v) promoting feeling of enmity or hatred between different classes of citizens of India on grounds of religion, race, caste, community or language;  (vi) going on strike or mass casual leave or restoring to mass abstentions;  (vii) spreading disaffection against the Government; and  (viii) cause riots and the like;"  Causing indiscipline amongst the fellow policemen and spreading disaffection against the Government have been treated as the gravest acts of misconduct in respect of a police officer facing disciplinary action.
The charges leveled against the petitioner fall within the ambit of clauses (iv) and (vii) of the Explanation to sub-rule (1) and Rule 162 of the Police Rules.
6.
The term "misconduct" as appearing in Rule 162(l) of the Police Rules was interpreted by the apex Court in State of Punjab v. Ram Singh Ex-constable, AIR 1992 SC 2188 : 1992(3) SCT 448 (SC) as under -  "6.
Rule 162(l) consists of two parts.
The first part is referable to gravest acts of misconduct which entails dwelling an order of dismissal.
Undoubtedly there is distinction between gravest misconduct and grave misconduct.
Before awarding an order of dismissal order should be made only when there are gravest acts of misconduct, that too when it impinges the pensionary rights of the delinquent after putting long length of service.
As stated the first part relates to gravest acts of misconduct.
Under General Clauses Act singular includes plural, act includes acts.
The contention that there must be plurality of acts of misconduct to award dismissal is fastidious.
The word "acts" would include singular "act" as well.
It is not the repetition of the acts complied of but its quality, insidious effect and gravity of situation that ensures from the offending "act".
The colour of the gravest act must be gathered from the surrounding or attending circumstances.
Take for instance the delinquent that put in 29 years of continuous length of service and had unblemished record; in 30th year he commits defalcation of public money or fabricates false records to conceal misappropriation.
He only committed once.
Does it mean that he should not be inflicted with the punishment of dismissal but be allowed to continue in service for that year to enable him to get his full pension.
The answer is obviously no.
Therefore, a single act of corruption is sufficient to award an order of dismissal under the rule as gravest act of misconduct.
7.
The second part of the rule connotes the cumulative effect of continues misconduct proving incorrigibility and complete unfitness of police service and that the length of service of the offender and his claim for pension should be taken into account in an appropriate case.
The contention that both parts must be read together appears to us to be illegal.
Second part is referable to a misconduct of minor in character which does not by itself warrant an order of dismissal but due to continued acts of misconduct would have insidious cumulative effect on service morale may be a ground to take lenient view of giving an opportunity to reform.
Despite giving such opportunities if the delinquent officer proved to be incorrigible and found complete unfit to remain in service than to maintain discipline in the service, instead of dismissing the delinquent officer, a lesser punishment of compulsory retirement or demotion to a lower grade or rank or removal from service without affecting his future chances of re-employment, if any, may meet the ends of justice.
Take for instance the delinquent officer is habitually absent from duty when required.
Despite giving an opportunity to reform himself he continues to remain absent from duty off and on.
He proved himself to be incorrigible and thereby unfit to continue in service.
Therefore, taking into account this long length of service and his claim for pension he may be compulsorily retired from service so as to enable him to earn proportionate pension.
The second part of the rule operates in that area.
It may also be made clear that the very order of dismissal from service for gravest misconduct may entail forfeiture of all pensionary benefits.
Therefore, the word 'or' cannot be read as 'and'.
It must be disjunctive and independent.
The common link that connects both clauses is "the gravest act/ acts of misconduct."
The charges levelled against the petitioner fall under the first part.
The second party of the rule is refer to misconduct of minor in character, which does not by itself warrant an order of dismissal from service.
It is only when the action is being taken under the second part of the rule that the delinquent's length of service and his claim for pension have to be kept in view.
7.
Learned counsel for the petitioner, in support of his submission, relied upon, two decisions of this Court in Bhim Singh v. Haryana State, etc., (1991-2) 100 PLR 190, and State of Punjab v. Achhar Singh (Died), (1991-2) 100 PLR 475.
In these cases, this Court was examining the second part of Rule 162(1) of the Police Rules which connotes the cumulative effect of continued misconduct proving incorrigibility and complete unfitness for police service.
The first part of this rule was not dealt within these two judgments and as such the ratio of these judgments has got no relevancy to the facts of the instant case.
The instant case is fully covered by the ratio of the judgment of the apex Court in Ram Singh, Ex-Constable's Case (supra).
Section 1638(1) of the Police Rules reads thus :-  (1) Where a preliminary enquiry or investigation into a complaint alleging the commission by an enrolled police officer of a criminal offence in connection with his official relations with the public establishes a prima facie case, a judicial prosecution shall normally follows.
Where, however, the Superintendent of Police proposes to proceed in the case departmentally, the concurrence of the District Magistrate shall be obtained."
It applies when (i) a complaint is received by a Superintendent of Police; (ii) that complaint indicates the commission of a criminal offence by police officer; and (iii) that too in connection with his official relations with the public.
In that event, before initiating departmental enquiry, information has to be given to the District Magistrate, who will decide whether the matter be departmentally dealt with or be subject of judicial prosecution.
If a prima facie case is established, judicial prosecution shall normally follow.
In the instant case, the charge against the petitioner is that he disobeyed the order of the Superintendent of Police/Director General of Police/Chief Minister, Haryana and in favour of unrecognised Police Sangathan and instigated the members of police force at the Police Station to co-operate with him and enroll themselves in the unrecognised Police Sangathan.
The petitioner has not committed any criminal offence in connection with his official relations with the public.
The allegations are in relation to his superiors and not public.
The judgment reported as Hari Shyam, AS Police Lines, Moga v. The State of Punjab, 1991(1) PLR 232, relied upon by the counsel for the petitioners in support of his submission that Rule 1638(1) of the Police Rules is applicable to the instant departmental enquiry has no bearing to the fact of the case.
In that case, the petitioner had prima facie committed substantive offence under the Indian Penal Code.
8.
For the reasons stated above, we find no infirmity in the orders under challenge.
The writ petition is accordingly dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.