RS Mongia, J (Oral) - The State of Haryana on 1131985 notified three vacancies belonging to Register A-I covering District Revenue Officers/Tehsildars/Naib-Tehsildars for appointment to H.C.S.
(Executive Branch) under the Punjab Civil Services (Executive Bench) Rules, 1930 (as applicable to State of Haryana).
2.
The Financial Commissioner (Revenue) prepared a list of eligible candidates and forwarded it to the Chief Secretary, Haryana for being placed before the Screening Committee consisting of Chief Secretary and two other officers.
Six names were forwarded to the Haryana Public Service Commission (hereinafter called the 'Commission'), which included the name of respondent No. 4, Shri Ashok Vashishat.
On 22.9.1988, the Commission recommended the names of three persons, S/Shri RC Sharma, Ram Chander and Ashok Vashishat for appointment to H.C.S.
(E.B.)
In pursuant of the recommendations of the Commission all the three recommendating of the Commission all the three recommendees' mentioned above were appointed to the H.C.S.
(E.B.)
on 3101988.
S/Shri KKGupta and RK Pandav filed two writ petitions (C.W.P.
Nos. 8855 of 1988 and 11555 of 1988) in this Court challenging the selection and appointment of the above referred two officers to H.C.S.
(E.B.).
The writ petitions came up for hearing before a Full Bench of this Court, and the same were allowed.
The appointment of the above three officers was quashed and the Commission was directed to make fresh selection/recommendations of three most suitable persons out of the six names forwarded to it by the Screening Committee.
The judgment in reported as Kamal Kumar Gupta v. The State of Haryana, 1991(1) SLR 91 : 1991(1) SCT 57 Para 18 of the judgment may be reproduced here :-  "18.
To sum up, the criteria laid out by the Commission has been found to be party bad and partly not implemented properly so as to deny equal opportunity to all the candidates required to be considered by the Commission.
Civil Writ Petitions No. 8855 of 1988 and 11555 of 1988 are, therefore, allowed, selection/recommendation made by the Commission on 2291988 and order of appointment dated 3.10.1.988 (Annexure P-3) made on the basis thereof, are hereby quashed and the Haryana Public Service Commission is directed to make fresh selection/recommendation of three most suitable persons out of the six names forwarded to it by the Committee headed by Chief Secretary to the State irrespective of subsequent developments on the basis of criteria held good, after excluding the part relating to age, applying the rest again with regard to assessment of annual confidential reports and experience in line in the light of observations made above and tabulating the result afresh, within two months from the receipt of the order.
The fresh recommendation shall be treated to have been made on 22.9.1988 and the candidates so recommended shall be entitled to all service benefits available to Haryana Civil Services (Executive Branch) since thereafter, irrespective of any subsequent developments.
No order for costs is, however, made."
It may be noticed here that S.L.Ps.
filed by the State Government as well as by respondent No. 4 against the above judgment were dismissed by the Supreme Court.
3.
The Commission in pursuance of the directions of this Court in KK Gupta's case referred to above, reconsidered the whole matter on 2111992 and recommended the names of S/Shri KK Gupta (petitioner before the Full Bench) RC Sharma and Ram Chander.
The Commission, however, did not find Sh. Ashok Vashishat respondent No. 4, suitable and, therefore, did not recommend his name.
On 2111992 Haryana Government amended the original notification dated 1131986 vide which three vacancies were notified for the H.C.S.
(E.B.)
from Register A-I and increased the number of vacancies to four.
The resultant effect of this notification was that for the year 1983 instead of three vacancies from Register A-I, there came to be four vacancies.
On the same day i.e. 2111992, when the notification dated March 11, 1985 was amended, the Government recommended to the Commission that respondent No. 4 be allowed to continue against newly created vacancy, but the Commission rejected the request.
4.
It has been stated that respondent No. 4 made two representations to the State Government on 1281991 and 16.10.1991, which were to the effect that the selection/recommendations made by the Government in pursuance of the judgment of Full Bench had not been in accordance with the observations of the Full Bench and he had been wrongly ignored from selection.
It was further mentioned that he had continuously held the post of H.C.S.
(E.B.)
since October, 1988 and it would be in the interest of justice and equity if his services were not terminated.
When the Commission did not agree with the proposal of the Government to allow respondent No. 4 (Sh. Ashok Vashishat) to continue on the newly created post the Council of Ministers overruled.
The Commission, the appointed respondent No. 4 to the newly created post on 2111992.
5.
Petitioner had been conveyed some adverse remarks regarding his integrity for the year 1985-86, which were made subject matter of challenge before a Civil Court.
The Civil Court decided the case in favour of the petitioner and ordered expunction of adverse remarks vide judgment dated 1321990.
In pursuance of the judgment of the Civil Court, the adverse remarks against the petitioner were expunged by the State Government.
6.
The primary grievance of the petitioner is that when the Financial Commissioner was making recommendations for being brought on Register A-I under : the Rules and also when the Screening Committee was considering the case, the adverse remarks for the year 1985-86 stood against the petitioner.
Once these remarks are expunged, the case of the petitioner has to be considered by ignoring those remarks.
It is the case of the petitioner that he was ignored for being brought on Register A-I because of the adverse remarks of the year 1985-86.
Further, it is the case of the petitioner that when the matter was reconsidered by the Commission in pursuance of the judgment of the Full Bench of this Court, the State Government should have considered the case of the petitioner afresh as by that time the adverse remarks of 1985-86 stood expunged.
7.
It is also argued that respondent No. 4 could not be appointed to the H.C.S.
(E.B.)
by the State Government as he had been found unsuitable by the Commission and the Council of Ministers had jurisdiction to overrule the recommendations the Commission.
8.
On behalf of the respondent, it has been argued that the initial recommendations were made in the year 1988 and the relevant record at that time had to be seen and it was on the basis of the relevant record of the petitioner that he was ignored for begin brought on Register A-I It his further been argued by the counsel for respondent No. 4 that the public Service Commission is only a recommendatory authority and for special reasons in case of hardship, the Council of Ministers can overrule the recommendations of the Commission.
According to the counsel, respondent No. 4 has been continuing on the post since 3101988 and it is too late in the day to challenge his appointment to the H.C.S.
(E.B.).
Learned counsel for the State also argued that the other three persons who were appointed to the H.C.S.
(E.B.)
i.e. S/Shri KK Gupta, RC Sharma and Ram Chander have not been impleaded as respondents in the case and no adverse order can e passed against them in their absence.
9.
After hearing the counsel for the parties, I am of the view that the petitioner had a right to be considered for the post in accordance with the relevant record.
Once the adverse remarks are expunged, the legal effect is as if they never existed.
The person concerned has a right to get his case considered afresh by ignoring those remarks which stand expunged.
However, the Court has to see that if in the interregnum period i.e. initial consideration and expunction of remarks, a long period has elapsed and some rights have come to vest in certain persons, who might have been appointed during that interregnum period, their interest has to be safeguarded.
But at the same time, the right of the person to be considered afresh by ignoring the remarks which stand expunged, also cannot be ignored.
A balance has to struck between the interest of both the parties.
10.
Considering all the facts and circumstances mentioned above, I am of the view that after the adverse remarks were expunged, the petitioner has a right to be considered afresh for being brought on Register A-I w.e.f.
the date when he was ignored for the same.
However, in case the petitioner is ultimately found suitable for appointment, the persons already appointed including respondent No. 4 would not be disturbed and they would continue to hold the posts.
In that eventuality the State Government would create a supernumerary post.
11.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is allowed and the State Government is directed to get the case of the petitioner reconsidered by ignoring the adverse remarks of the year 1985-86 which stand expunged in accordance with Rules for the 1983 vacancies when the cases of S/Shri KK Gupta, Ram Chander and RC Sharma, were considered.
In case the petitioner is found ultimately suitable for appointment, a supernumerary post will be created without disturbing the appointment of S/Shri KK Gupta, RC Sharma, Ram Chander and respondent No. 4.
In such an eventuality, petitioner will be given all the consequential benefits.
12.
I am told that the petitioner is going to retire in July 1994.
It will be in the fitness of things if these directions are carried out within three months from the receipt of copy of this order or when the petitioner brings the copy of the order to the notice of the respondents.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.