NK Kapoor, J - This is defendant's appeal against the judgment of the Additional District Judge, Jalandhar, dated 1531991 whereby the appeal filed by the plaintiff was accepted thereby decreeing his claim.
2.
Briefly put, the plaintiff filed a suit for declaration to the effect that the order dated 2131983 passed by the Commandant terminating the services of the plaintiff is illegal, wrong, criptic, capricious, without jurisdiction and against the terms and conditions of the employment and against the Punjab Police Rules etc. and the plaintiff continues to be in service on the same emoluments as admissible from time to time.
3.
Defendant put in appearance, filed written statement and controverted the various averments made in the plaint.
Besides this, the defendant urged that the suit of the plaintiff is barred by limitation, bad for non-joinder of necessary parties and not maintainable as no notice under Section 80 of the Code of Civil Procedure was served before the filing of the suit.
4.
On the pleadings of the parties, following issues were framed :-  1.
Whether impugned order dated 2131983 is illegal, null and void ?
OPP  2.
Whether present suit is barred by limitation ?
OPD.
3.
Whether valid and legal notice under section 80 Code of Civil Procedure has not been served on the defendant ?
OPD  4.
Whether the suit is bad for non-joinder of necessary parties ?
OPD.
5.
Relief.
The trial Court after appraising the evidence led by the parties held that the order of discharge was neither illegal nor void and thus decided issue No. 1 against the plaintiff.
Under issue No. 2 it was held that the suit was filed after the expiry of period of limitation.
Issues No. 3 and 4 were decided against the defendant as no evidence was led by the defendant in support of these issues.
5.
The lower appellate Court once again examined the case on facts as well as law and came to the conclusion that the order of discharge is, in fact, by way of punishment and this way the same is unsustainable in law.
Finding on issue No. 2 was also reversed holding that since order is illegal and void, there is no period of limitation to challenge such orders.
Resultantly, the appeal was accepted and the judgment and decree of the trial Court dismissing the suit of the plaintiff was reversed.
6.
The learned counsel for the appellant besides highlighting the order of discharge which was passed by the Commandant under Rule 1221 of the Punjab Police Rules for the solitary reason that the plaintiff with a view to get entry into service changed his date of birth from 15.8.1953 to 1581955, urged that even otherwise the impugned order was passed on 2131983 whereas the suit was instituted on 28.11.87 which per se is barred.
The counsel in support of his contention relied upon the decision of the apex Court in case reported as State of Punjab and others v. Gurdev Singh and others, AIR 1991 Supreme Court, 2219 : 1991(3) SCT 488.
The factual aspects are not in dispute.
Admittedly, there was interpolation in the matriculation certificate with regard to the change of his date of birth from 15.8.1953 to 1581955.
As soon as this came to the notice of the higher authorities, they chose to terminate his services under rule 1221 of the Punjab Police Rules precisely for the reason that such a person is not likely to become an efficient police officer.
This order was passed on 2131983 which was sought to be challenged by means of a declaratory decree on 28111987.
A suit for declaration that the order of termination or dismissal from service passed against the plaintiff-dismissed employee is illegal and void, is governed by Article 113 of the Limitation Act.
It is a residuary Article and is to be applied in cases which are not covered by any other specific provision of the Limitation Act.
All the same any party aggrieved by an order has to challenge the same within the stipulated period of limitation.
The present case is per se beyond period of limitation in view of the judgment of the apex Court in Gurdev Singh's case (supra).
I accordingly allow this appeal, set aside the judgment and decree of the lower appellate Court and thus uphold the judgment and decree of the trial Court whereby the suit of the plaintiff was dismissed.
The parties will, however, bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.