NC Jain, J - The facts giving rise to the filing of this appeal by the defendants may briefly be noticed in order to appreciate the precise question involved in the present appeal.
Plaintiff-respondent Ravinder Singh Brar, Junior Engineer at the relevant time filed a suit for declaration that the order dated 1481985, passed by defendant No.2, Chief Engineer, imposing recovery of Rs. 39,487/- and withholding two in crements without cumulative effect was illegal and void.
The plaintiff also claimed a decree or permanent injunction restraining defendant No. 4, Executive Engineer from effecting recovery of the amount from his pay.
According to the averments made in the plaint, the plaintiff was charge sheeted on 22121984.
He submitted his reply to the charge sheet and, thereafter, the impugned order dated 1481985 was passed.
The impugned order was challenged on the grounds that the same was not speaking one and that no personal hearing was given to the plaintiff.
The defendants admitted in the written statement that the plaintiff was charge sheeted but it was maintained that the impugned order was passed after obtaining and considering the reply of the plaintiff.
It was averred in the written statement that no inquiry was required to be conducted for inflicting a minor punishment upon the plaintiff.
2.
On the pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed by the trial Court :-  1-Whether the impugned order dated 14-8-1985 imposing penalty of Rs. 39,487/- is void, illegal, for reasons alleged in the plaint?
OPP  2-Whether this Court has no jurisdiction to try this suit?
OPD  3-Whether the plaintiff has no cause of action to file the suit?
OPD  4-Relief.
3.
The trial Court decided issue No. 1 against the plaintiff.
Under issue No. 2, it was held that civil court has jurisdiction to try the suit.
The plaintiff was found to have no cause of action to file the suit, under issue No. 3.
The suit having been dismissed by the trial Court, an appeal was preferred by the plaintiff before the First Appellate court.
The First Appellate court set aside the judgment of the trial Court.
Mr. AS Jatana, learned Assistant Advocate General, Punjab, has vehemently argued that there was absolutely no need to conduct an inquiry because the plaintiff was given minor punishment within the meaning and ambit of Rule 10 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970.
It has further been argued that the order cannot be described to be non-speaking because it has been specifically written in the order that the reply was considered and found unsatisfactory.
On the other hand, the counsel for the plaintiff-respondent has argued that the order Exhibit P-3 deserves to be quashed on the short ground that the same is not a speaking one.
It has further been brought to my notice that in all, three charges were levelled against the plaintiff, namely embezzlement of Rs. 39487/-, disobedience of the orders of the superiors and tampering with the official record.
According to the counsel for the plaintiff no specific finding was given on each of the charges, therefore, the order was bad.
4.
Having given my thoughtful consideration to the matter, I am of the view that the present case is covered by a Division Bench Judgment State of Punjab and another v. Dr. Ram Kishan Chopra, PCMS reported in 1977(2) S.L.R.
809.
In the aforementioned case the imposition of punishment of withholding of one increment without cumulative effect was set aside on the ground that the order was non-speaking.
It was held that mere use of words "considered" in the impugned order was not a sufficient compliance of the principles of natural justice.
The decision in the State of Punjab and another case (supra), is applicable in all force to the facts of the present case.
The order in the decided case reads as under :-  "Reference your explanation dated the 30th June, 1964 in reply to Punjab Government Memorandum No7759-V(ASO-2)6315713, dated the 4th December, 1963, on the subject noted above.
2.
Your explanation has been fully considered and the same has been found to be unsatisfactory.
The Governor of Punjab is accordingly pleased to impose on.
you the penalty of stoppage of your next one increment without cumulative effect.
3.
A copy of this communication is being placed on your personal confidential record".
In the case in hand also the order reads as under :-  "You while posted as Junior Engineer in Provisional.
Sub Divn.
PWD B&R Branch, Rampuraphul w.e.f.
31-5-74 to 1-6-81 did not check consumption of the material on a work of strengthening of Rampura Salabatpura road and caused a Govt. loss of Rs. 39,487/- by misappropriation of Govt. material on this road.
On this account you were charge sheeted vide this office memo No.6225/I&C dated 22-12-1984 which was received by you on 21-1-1985.
You gave reply and the comments were submitted by the S.E.
Bhatinda Circle, B & R Bhatinda vide his memo No. 1449 dated 2-7-1985.
Your reply was not considered satisfactory after consideration.
I, JS Sodhi, Chief Engineer (South) Pb.
PWD B&R Branch, Patiala, having satisfied myself hereby impose upon the punishment of (i) stoppage of two grade increments without future effect (ii) Recovery of Rs. 39,487/- (Rs. Thirty nine thousand four hundred & eighty seven only).
A copy of this order is being placed in your RR File."
5.
A bare perusal of the two orders i.e. passed in the decided case and in the case in hand go to show that no reasoning was forthcoming for rejecting the explanation.
The present case stands on a better footing inasmuch as by way of impugned order the recovery of Rs. 39,487/- was also ordered.
No authority to the contrary has been cited by the counsel for the appellants.
The judgment and decree of the First Appellate Court deserves to be upheld on an additional ground.
Rule 10(d) of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 Vol, 1, Part-II.
envisages the recording of finding of each imputation of misconduct or misbehaviour.
No finding as is apparent from the perusal of the impugned order, was recovered by the concerned authority.
6.
For the reasons recorded above, the appeal is found to be devoid of any merit and is ordered to be dismissed with no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.