NK Sodhi, J - When an ad hoc appointee is subsequently selected afresh by the competent authority on regular basis, would the date of his regular appointment relate back to the date of his initial appointment on ad hoc basis and if not, whether such ad hoc service would count towards his seniority are the two primary questions which arise for determination in this petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution.
Facts giving rise to these questions may first be noticed.
2.
Post of an Architect in the Department of Architecture, Punjab, is a Class-I post in the pay scale of Rs. 800-1600/- (un-revised).
By an advertisement dated August 10, 1975 applications were invited by the department of Architecture, Punjab, amongst others, for one post of an Architect and the qualifications and experience required for these posts were mentioned therein, as also the pay scales.
There was a stipulation in the advertisement that the posts mentioned in it were temporary thou they were likely to continue indefinitely appointments would be made on ad hoc basis for six months or till such time regular recommendees of the Punjab Public Service Commission (for short, `the Commission') became available, whichever was earlier.
Shri PR Luthra, respondent No. 4 who was then working against the post of an Assistant Architect and being eligible, applied for the same.
The petitioner was also an applicant besides several other candidates.
The departmental selection committee after interviewing all the eligible candidates, selected Shri PR Luthra and the petitioner in this order of merit and recommended Shri Luthra who was placed at No. 1 for appointment on ad hoc basis to the post of Architect.
As there was only one vacancy, Respondent No. 4 was appointed as per letter dated 521976 (Annexure R4/3 with the written statement of respondent No. 4) on ad hoc basis for a period of six months or till such time a candidate appointed through the Commission became available, whichever was earlier.
In the meantime, one more post of an Architect fell vacant in July, 1976.
The department decided to fill up the same on ad hoc basis pending regular selection by the Commission.
Since the petitioner had been selected by the departmental selection committee at Sr. No. 2, he was offered this post and was appointed on ad hoc basis as per letter dated July 1/5, 1976 (Annexure P-4 with the writ petition).
The relevant terms and conditions of his appointment as mentioned in the letter read as under :-  "2.
Your are hereby offered appointment to the post of Architect in the scale of Rs. 800-50-1300/50-1600 plus such allowances as are mentioned by the Punjab Government from time to time, on ad hoc basis, for a period of six months or till such time a suitable candidate is appointed through the Punjab Public Service Commission, whichever is earlier.
This appointment is made on the following terms and conditions :  i) xx, xx, xx,  ii) xx, xx, xx,  iii) xx, xx, xx,  iv) xx, xx, xx,  v) xx, xx, xx,  vi) xx, xx, xx,  vii) xx, xx, xx,  viii) xx, xx, xx,  ix) In the event of your regular appointment as such at any time, on the recommendation of Punjab Public Service Commission the period of ad hoc appointment will not count towards probation period or for the purpose of seniority.
3.
In case you are willing to accept the appointment on the above terms and conditions you should appear before the Medical Board to determine your fitness or otherwise.
4. xx, xx, xx,  xx, xx, xx,  Though the petitioner was initially appointed for six months, it is not disputed that his ad hoc appointment continued uninterrupted till the date he was given fresh regular appointment after consultation with the Commission.
Thereafter, the turn of respondent No. 4 who was working as an Architect on ad hoc basis as a direct recruit came for promotion on the basis of his seniority as Assistant Architect in the department.
He was, therefore, promoted to the post of Architect by order dated March 22, 1978 wef.
the date the officer immediately junior to him took over charge as Architect.
This date is June 2, 1977.
In other words, this respondent was promoted w.e.f.
June 2, 1977 and the promotion was purely temporary and provisional and subject to the approval of the Commission.
The promotion order said that Shri PR Luthra who was working as Architect on ad hoc basis as a direct recruit was being diverted against a promotion quota post of Architect in accordance with his seniority as an Assistant Architect.
It is not disputed before me that the Commission approved the promotion of respondent No. 4 on August 2, 1983.
Similarly, respondents 5 to 10 who were working as Assistant Architects were also promoted on different dates subject to approval by the Commission which approval was accorded later.
Two posts of Architects occupied on ad hoc basis by the petitioner and respondent No. 4 who was later diverted against a promotion quota post had to be filled up on regular basis on the recommendations of the Commission.
It appears that a requisition was sent to the Commission in this regard, which issued an advertisement some time in the later half of the year 1978 inviting applications for the recruitment for two posts of Architects Class-I under the Chief Architect, Department of Architecture, Punjab.
The qualifications for these posts, as also their pay scales were mentioned in the advertisement and clause- 12 thereof read as under :-  "12.
Employees working under the Central Government or State Government shall not be entitled to any benefit of their previous service."
The petitioner along with many others applied for the posts.
After interviewing the eligible candidates, the Commission selected the petitioner and he was given a fresh appointment as per letter dated March 3, 1979 (Annexure P7 with the writ petition).
The relevant portion of the letter of appointment issued to the petitioner is reproduced hereunder for facility of reference :-  "2.
On the recommendations of the Punjab Public Service Commission, the Governor of Punjab is pleased to offer to you an appointment to the post of Architect in the scale of Rs. 800-50-1300/50-1600 plus usual allowances sanctioned by the Punjab Government from time to time in Punjab Service of Architects (Class 1) in the Architecture Department on the following terms and conditions of service :-  1) Nature of appointment.
i) xx, xx, xx.
ii) NY, xx, xx.
iii) xx, xx, xx.
II) xx, xx, xx.
III) xx, xx, xx.
IV) Service Rules applicable : You shall be governed by the Punjab Service of Architects (Class-I) Rules as and when these rules are finalised.
Till then you shall be governed by the Model Service Rules, 1973 issued vide Punjab Government letter No. 6780-DSSII (2)-73 dated the 5th November, 1973.
In respect of the matters not expressly provided for in the said Rules, you shall be governed by such rules and regulations as may have been or may hereafter be framed by competent authority under Article 309 of the Constitution of India.
V) to XI) xx, xx, xx.
XII) Seniority : Your seniority will be determined according to the merit fixed by the Punjab Public Service Commission, subject to the provision of rule 10 of Model Service Rules referred to above till the Punjab Service of Architects (Class-I) Rules are finalised whereafter it will be governed in accordance with the provisions of the latter rules.
XIII) & XIV) xx, xx, xx."
The department then prepared a tentative seniority list of Architects (Class-I) in the department of Architecture, Punjab as on 111985.
In this seniority list, respondent No. 4 was shown at Sr. No. 10 and respondents 5 to 10 were also shown senior to the petitioner who was placed at Sr. No. 19.
The petitioner had been given his seniority from the date on which he was regularly selected by the Commission ignoring his past ad hoc service.
The basis on which the respondents were given the seniority was the date of their initial appointment by way of promotion as Architects though in their case, the approval of the Commission subject to which they had been promoted, came later.
The petitioner claims that his ad hoc service from July, 1976 till March, 1979 when he was appointed/selected on regular basis should also be counted inter alia for the purposes of seniority.
He made a representation to the department, which was ignored.
Consequently, he filed Civil Writ Petition No. 4761 of 1989 in this Court which was disposed of by directing the authorities to decide the representation of the petitioner by a reasoned order.
Thereafter, another representation is stated to have been filed, which along with the earlier one has been rejected by the State Government as per its order dated August 16, 1989.
It is this order which has been impugned in the present writ petition.
3.
Admitted case of the parties before me is that the Punjab Service of Architects (Class-I) Rules have not yet been notified and do not govern the service of Architects and I am informed that the matter regarding finalisation of these rules was lying with the Governor-in-Council before the popular government took over in the State of Punjab in February this year.
The matter is now stated to be with the Government and no final decision has yet been taken in regard to the quota of the direct recruits nor in relation to the posts earmarked for them.
In the absence of any statutory rules governing the Service, it was not seriously disputed on behalf of the petitioner that in the matter of seniority, he would be governed by Rule 10 of the Model Service Rules, 1973 in view of the terms and conditions of his appointment enumerated in the letter of appointment, Annexure P7.
It would be relevant to notice at this stage Rule 10 of the Model Service Rules, 1973.
The relevant part of this Rule reads as under :-  "10.
The seniority inter se of members of the Service shall be determined by the length of continuous service on a post in the Service :  Provided xx, xx, xx.
Provided further that in the case of members recruited by direct appointment, the order of merit determined by the Commission, the Board or other recruiting authority, as the case may be, shall not be disturbed in fixing the seniority :  Provided xx, xx, xx.
Note :- Seniority of members appointed on purely provisional basis, shall be determined as and when they are regularly appointed keeping in view the date of such regular appointment.
It is in the aforesaid circumstances and in the light of Rule 10 of the Model Service Rules that the petitioner has contended before me that (i) since his ad hoc appointment was followed by his regular selection by the Commission, his date of regular selection should relate back to the date of his initial appointment on ad hoc basis and, therefore, in terms of Rule 10 of the Model Service Rules, his seniority should be counted from July, 1976 when he was appointed on ad hoc basis and further that (ii) even if the initial appointment was not made by following the procedure inasmuch as the Commission had not been consulted, the petitioner continued on the post uninterruptedly till he was given regular appointment after consolation with the Commission and, therefore, the period of ad hoc service be counted towards his seniority.
For these contentions, learned counsel for the petitioner has placed strong reliance on the judgments of the Supreme Court in GP Doval v. Chief Secretary, Government of UP and others, 1984(2) S.L.R.
555 and Direct Recruit Class II Engineering Officers Association v. State of Maharashtra and others, AIR 1990 SC 1607, particularly on paragraph 13 of this judgment and conclusion (B) in paragraph 44.
4.
The claim of the petitioner has been strenuously opposed on behalf of the respondents who contend that the date of regular appointment of the petitioner cannot, in the circumstances of the present case, relate back to the date of his initial appointment on ad hoc basis.
While placing strong reliance on the corollary to conclusion (A) in the Direct Recruits case (supra), it was sought to be urged that the initial appointment of the petitioner was only ad hoc and not according to the rules and made as a stop- gap arrangement pending regular selection by the Commission and, therefore, such ad hoc service could not be taken into account for considering his seniority.
5.
I have given my thoughtful consideration to the rival contentions of the parties and express my inability to accept either of the contentions raised on behalf of the petitioner.
Admittedly, the petitioner was appointed on ad hoc basis as a stop-gap arrangement in July, 1976 pending regular selection through the Commission and even though his initial appointment was for a period of six months or till a regularly selected person through the Commission was appointed, whichever was earlier, he continued working on ad hoc basis till he was selected afresh by the Commission and a regular appointment order issued in March, 1979.
While the petitioner was still working on ad hoc basis, the Commission advertised two posts of Architects for making fresh selection and made it clear that the employees working with the State Government would not be entitled to any benefit of their previous service.
The petitioner not only applied for one of these posts but also appeared for interview before the Commission and was selected.
It was thereafter, that a regular appointment order on the recommendation of the Commission was issued in March, 1979.
It is, thus, clear that it was not a case where the initial appointment of the petitioner was being approved or confirmed nor could it be said that the initial appointment which was made without consulting the Commission was being regularised.
To all intents and purposes, it was a fresh selection and appointment.
In my opinion, if a person is appointed temporarily or on ad hoc basis by way of stop-gap arrangement and his appointment is not in accordance with rules and subsequently the competent authority or the Commission approves or regularises or confirms the initial appointment then the date of regular appointment would relate back to the date of his initial appointment.
Similarly, if a person is promoted temporarily, provisionally or on ad hoc basis pending approval or confirmation by the Commission or any other competent authority, and if such approval or confirmation is granted subsequently, it would also relate back to the date of initial promotion even though that was not in accordance with the rules.
If, on the other hand, a person is appointed on temporary or ad hoc basis as a stop-gap arrangement pending final selection by the Commission or any other competent authority and such competent authority later chooses of make a fresh selection by advertising the post and selects the ad hoc appointee after considering the claims of others as well, the date of regular selection would not relate back to the date of initial appointment.
In such a case the competent authority is not formally approving or regularising the initial appointment but making a fresh selection where others are also considered.
As already stated earlier, in the case in hand, when the petitioner was selected afresh in March, 1979, it was not a mere formality or a process undertaken by the Commission only for formalising his initial ad hoc appointment, It was a fresh selection for the post had been advertised and when not only the petitioner but others were also considered.
The date of regular selection in the case of the petitioner cannot, therefore, relate back to the date of his initial appointment.
6.
In GP Doval and others case (supra), the petitioners therein were initially appointed on temporary and ad hoc basis as a measure of stop-gap arrangement between March 1960 and March 1961 and their appointment was approved by the Public Service Commission for regular appointment on September 30, 1963.
Some of the respondents in that case had been appointed later but in the provisional seniority list drawn in the year 1971 were shown senior to the petitioners.
This seniority list was sought to he justified on the ground that it had been drawn up keeping in view the date of approval by the Public Service Commission in respect of each candidate.
In other words, the service rendered by the petitioners on temporary and ad hoc basis had not been included.
While quashing the seniority list and holding that the temporary and ad hoc service of the petitioners had to be counted, their Lordships observed as under :-  ".....
If the first appointment is made by not following the prescribed procedure but later on appointee is approved making his appointment regular, it is obvious common sense that in the absence of a contrary rule, the approval which means confirmation by the authority, which had the authority, power and jurisdiction to make appointment or recommend for appointment, will relate back to the date on which first appointment is made and the entire service will have to be computed in reckoning the seniority according to the length of continuous officiation.
That has not been done in this case ......"  Again, in paragraph 15 of the judgment, their Lordships observed as under :-  "It is, thus, well settled that where officiating appointment is followed by confirmation unless a contrary rule is shown, the service rendered as officiating appointment cannot be ignored for reckoning length of continuous officiation for determining the place in the seniority list..." (emphasis supplied)  It is true that some observations in paragraph 15 of this judgment, if read in isolation, do support the contention of the petitioner but the primary reason for reckoning ad hoc service of the petitioners was that their initial appointment which was on ad hoc basis had been approved by the Public Service Commission and, therefore, it had to relate back to the date of first appointment.
Moreover, there was no rule governing the service of the petitioners in that case like Rule 10 of the Model Service Rules, 1973 governing the service of the petitioner in the case in hand, according to which seniority is to be determined as and when regular appointment is made keeping in view the date of such regular appointment.
GP Doval and others case (supra), in my opinion, does not support the contention advanced on behalf of the petitioner.
7.
In DN Agrawala v. State of Madhya Pradesh, JT 1990(2) SC 9, the appellants were appointed as Junior Engineers by direct recruitment and were later promoted on ad hoc basis on 2271971 though they were not eligible.
These promotions were made by having recourse to the rule of `administrative exigencies' contained in the proviso to Rule 19(1) of the Rules governing their service.
Respondents 40 to 63 had been appointed by direct appointment on August 7, 1972.
The appellants and respondents 2 to 39 were then selected as Junior Engineers by the departmental promotion committee on 22111972.
In the rules governing the service of the appellants, the departmental promotion committee was the competent authority to make regular appointments/selections.
In the seniority list prepared by the department, the appellants were given seniority w.e.f.
November 22, 1972 but they claimed w.e.f.
July 22, 1971.
In other words, the appellants wanted their ad hoc service to be counted towards seniority.
The claim of the appellants was repelled by their Lordships of the Supreme Court.
It is true that the appellants were initially ineligible when they were promoted on ad hoc basis on 2271971 but their Lordships after referring to GP Doval's case (supra) and Baleshwar Dass v. State of UP, 1981(1) SCR 449, observed as under :-  "It will thus be clear that the Court was dealing with an altogether different situation in both the aforesaid cases.
There was no dispute in those cases that except for the terminology and nomenclature there was no distinction between a temporary and permanent appointment and all that remained to be done in those cases was the formalisation of the appointments ......." (emphasis supplied)  Again, it was observed as under :-  .... Their selection/appointment on November 22, 1972 by the DPC was further not a mere formality or a process undertaken only for formalisation of their earlier appointment.
In the circumstances, their appointment on November 22, 1972 could not relate back to July 22, 1971 and hence they were not entitled to claim their officiation between July 22, 1971 and November 22, 1972 for being counted for the purposes of their seniority ......."  8.
The view that I have taken finds support from the aforesaid judgments of the Supreme Court and also from the decision in Masood Akhtar Khan v. State of Madhya Pradesh, JT 1990(3) SC 295.
In this case, the petitioners who were direct recruits were appointed in October, 1972 as Assistant Engineers in the Public Health Department temporarily for a period of six months or till selection of the candidate by the Public Service Commission.
Their temporary appointment continued till they were selected by the Commission and as a result whereof they were appointed to the posts in April, 1977.
Their contention that they should be given seniority from the date of their initial appointment on October 25, 1972 was repelled, primarily because the advertisement on the basis of which the initial temporary appointment was made had made it clear that the appointment would be for six months only and the final selection would be made by the Public Service Commission before which the candidates had to appear.
This judgment was later approved/followed by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Keshev Chander Joshi.
v. Union of India, AIR 1991 SC 284.
9.
I shall now deal with the other limb of the argument which should not detain us long.
It was urged that even if the date of regular selection of the petitioner was not to relate back to the date of his initial appointment, he was at any rate, entitled to have his ad hoc service counted towards his seniority because his ad hoc appointment continued uninterruptedly till the date he was regularly selected.
Strong reliance was placed on paragraph 13 and conclusion (B) in paragraph 44 of the judgment in Direct Recruits' case (supra).
A similar contention was raised before their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Keshav Chander Joshi's case (supra) and was not accepted.
I am of the view that in the facts and circumstances of the present case, the case of the petitioner is directly covered by the corollary to conclusion (A) in paragraph 44 of the judgment in Direct Recruits' case (supra) wherein it has been held that where the initial appointment is only ad hoc and not according to rules and made as a stop-gap arrangement, the officiation in such post cannot be taken into account for considering the seniority.
The argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner has, therefore, no merit and must be rejected.
10.
There is yet another aspect of the matter.
When the petitioner was appointed on ad hoc basis in July, 1976, it was clearly mentioned in his appointment letter that his appointment was on ad hoc basis for a period of six months or till such time a suitable candidate is appointed through the Commission.
It was further stated that in the event of his regular appointment, at any time, on the recommendation of the Commission, the period of his ad hoc appointment would not count towards his seniority.
The petitioner accepted these terms and joined the post.
Thereafter, when the posts were advertised for regular appointment, the advertisement made it clear that the employees working under the State Government would not be entitled to any benefit of their previous service.
The petitioner applied in pursuance of this advertisement and was selected.
The letter of appointment issued to him made it clear that till the Punjab Service of Architects (Class-I) Rules are finalised, he would be governed by the Model Service Rules, 1973, Note-2 to Rule 10 whereof makes it absolutely clear that seniority of the petitioner is to be counted from the date of his regular appointment.
In view of the fact that this rule governs his service, the inescapable conclusion is that the seniority of the petitioner has to be determined from the date of his regular appointment and not when he was initially appointed on ad hoc basis even though he continued uninterruptedly thereafter.
Support for this view can be had from a Division Bench judgment of this Court in Sohan Lal v. State of Haryana and others, 1992(4) S.L.R.
190 : 1992(3) SCT 378.
Moreover, it has been held by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in the aforementioned judgments that when advertisements and orders of appointment indicate that the appointment is only for a limited period subject to recruitment by the Commission, the appointments are only emergency arrangement pending regular selection by the Commission and, therefore, the entire length of service cannot be counted for seniority.
For this reason as well the seniority of the petitioner must count from the date of his regular appointment.
11.
Having failed in his primary contentions, learned counsel for the petitioner then urged with equal vehemence that in the absence of any statutory rules governing the service of Architects, respondents 1 to 3 have by administrative instructions fixed a quota of 40 per cent vacancies to be filled by direct recruits and the remaining 60 per cent by departmental promotions.
It has also been submitted that within the 40 per cent quota meant for direct recruits, the administrative instructions, according to the petitioner, have further earmarked the posts meant for them and it is this rotational system which is envisaged by the instructions.
The argument is that in a block of every 10 vacancies, the first 6 are meant for the promotees while the remaining 4 fall to the share of the direct recruits.
The petitioner contends that he was the first direct recruit to be appointed in the year 1979 or at the most he was the second one as according to the department, the first direct recruit was candidate from the reserved category and, therefore, according to the petitioner, he is entitled to be given his seniority against the 7th or 8th roster point meant for direct recruits.
The categoric stand of the respondents, on the other hand, is one of complete denial.
It is submitted on their behalf that there are no such instructions as alleged by the petitioner nor there is any quota meant for the promotees or direct recruits and the question of there being any rotational system does not arise.
Whether there is any quota at all for the direct recruits and the promotees and whether the posts have been earmarked as per the rotation mentioned by the petitioner is essentially a question of fact.
In order to support his contention, learned counsel for the petitioner relies upon a number of documents which have been attached with the writ petition.
Annexure P-1 is a letter dated August 1, 1974, the author of which is the Senior Architect, Department of Architecture, Punjab, Chandigarh.
This letter does make a reference to the 60 per cent and 40 per cent proportion referred to by the petitioner and also states that in a block of 10 vacancies, the first 6 are allocated to the departmental candidates and next 4 to the direct recruits.
Annexure P2 is another letter dated September 10, 1975 from the State Government addressed to the Commission.
This is a requisition for filling up posts in the department of Architecture, Punjab.
This letter mentions that 4 posts of Architects were required to be filled up by direct recruits.
Annexure P3 is the order of the State Government promoting amongst other respondent No. 4 as an Architect and diverting him against a promotion quota post as he was working on ad hoc basis as an Architect against a direct recruit post.
Similarly, there are more documents to indicate that an exercise for framing the statutory rules which would ultimately govern the service of Architects was going on in the department, and in the draft rules initially prepared the Government had proposed a ratio of 60 : 40 between the departmental candidates and the direct recruits.
It is also not disputed before me that the Commission gave its approval to this ratio in June, 1975, It appears that thereafter, appointments by way of promotion were made in the department with reference to this quota.
The matter had not yet been finalised when the Government appears to have changed its mind and proposed to the Commission that appointments to the posts of Architects be made only by way of promotions.
The Commission did not accord its approval to this proposal.
There are some documents on the record to show that the Government then proposed a proportion of 70 : 30 between the promotees and the direct recruits.
Even this proposal does not seem to have been approved by the Commission.
The rules are still at the stage of draft rules and no final decision has yet been reached.
However, learned counsel for the petitioner was very emphatic that pending finalization of the rules, the department was adhering to the 60 : 40 proportion between the promotees and the direct recruits to which the Commission had earlier granted its approval and that the Government had also prepared a roster for the promotees as well as the direct recruits, earmarking the posts meant for each category.
I sent for the Joint Secretary, Department of Architecture, Punjab along with the original record with a view to satisfy myself as to the factual position.
Shri Jatinder Singh, Joint Secretary produced the entire record and I have perused the same.
It is clear that the matter regarding quota has not yet been finalised even though after obtaining the approval from the Commission for the 60 : 40 proportion, the department for some time did make appointments against the alleged promotion quota and even in excess thereof when, according to the department, direct recruits were not available.
I have seen the registers in which separate quotas for the direct recruits and the promotees have been prepared and maintained but no posts have been earmarked for either of them.
The Joint Secretary was very emphatic that even though this exercise had been going on in the department for the last several years, the matter has not yet been finally decided one way or the other and at no stage, according to him, did the department ever adhere to the rotational system as alleged by the petitioner.
After going through the record as well as the documents which have been appended with the writ petition, I cannot record a positive finding that there was a quota of 60 : 40.
Even if one was to assume that there was such a quota and that the department adhered to it for some time, there is nothing on the record to show that the posts were earmarked for either category.
In this view of the matter, the petitioner is not justified in claiming that according to the alleged roster point No. 7 or 8, he should be given his seniority.
This contention of the petitioner also fails.
12.
Lastly, it was argued that the petitioner had been discriminated inasmuch his seniority was determined from the date of his regular appointment whereas in ease of respondents 5 to 10 it was reckoned from the date of their initial temporary promotion.
This argument is fallacious and has to be rejected.
The case of the petitioner is altogether different from that of the respondents and in my opinion there is no discrimination.
The respondents were promoted on temporary basis pending approval by the Commission which was subsequently received and it, therefore, had to relate back to the dates of their initial promotions/appointments.
Petitioner, on the other hand, had been directly appointed afresh by the Commission in March, 1979 and his seniority had to be fixed from this date no matter that he had earlier worked for some time on ad hoc basis as well.
13.
In the result, I find no merit in the petition which stands dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.