Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - Aggrieved by the order of premature retirement, the plaintiff-appellant filed a suit for a declaration that the order is arbitrary, mala fide, illegal and not binding on him.
The suit was dismissed.
Even the appeal met the same fate.
2.
Aggrieved by the judgment and decree passed by the Courts below, the appellant has come up in this second appeal.
A few facts may be noticed.
3.
The appellant joined as a clerk in the office of the Deputy Commissioner, Amritsar in the year 1947.
On October 26, 1960, he was promoted as an Assistant.
On November 15, 1970, the appellant was joined as a District Nazir.
While he was working as such, the appellant was placed under suspension on July 5, 1977.
Copy of this order is on record as Ex.P-1.
On July 8, 1977, a criminal case was registered against the appellant., On August 4, 1977, while he was still under suspension, the appellant was ordered to be retired under the provisions of Punjab Civil Services (Premature Retirement) Rules, 1975.
This order was challenged on the ground that it is wholly arbitrary, capricious, ultra vires, unconstitutional and against the principles of natural justice.
4.
The claim of the plaintiff-appellant was controverted in the written statement filed on behalf of the respondent.
It was inter alia stated-that except for the years 1975-76 and 1976-77, the appellant's record of service is `good'.
It was further stated that his honesty is doubtful as he has been held responsible for embezzling government money and six cases under Section 409 of the Indian Penal Code stand registered against him in Police Station, Civil Lines, Amritsar.
The averment that the appellant was placed under suspension on July 5, 1977, was admitted.
On these premises, the order of premature retirement was sought to be dismissed.
5.
On the pleadings of the parties, the learned trial Court framed the following issues :  1.
Whether the impugned order dated 4.8.1977 is arbitrary, mala fide, illegal and not binding on the plaintiff as alleged in the plaint ?
OPP.
2.
Does non-issue of the notice or non-payment of three months salary in lieu of the notice or non-payment of pension make the retirement order invalid ?
OPP.
3.
Relief.
6.
The trial Court concluded that "from the evidence which the parties have brought on record and in view of the demand made by the plaintiff it is clear that he was placed under suspension on 571977 on the basis that six cases were registered against him by the Department for embezzlement under Section 409 IPC So the registration of the case under Section 409 IPC is sufficient material to consider the case of the plaintiff for his premature retirement on his attaining the age of 55 years."
Accordingly, it was held that the order of premature retirement is valid and the suit was dismissed.
7.
This finding having been affirmed by the learned lower appellate Court, the plaintiff has come up in this second appeal.
8.
Mr. Baldev Raj Mahajan, the learned counsel for the appellant has raised a two-fold contention.
Firstly, it is urged that the order of premature retirement while an employee is under suspension is per se punitive and cannot be sustained.
It is further contended that the appellant has been discharged in three out of the six cases by the Court of Magistrate.
In the other three cases, it was found that there was no evidence to support the charges and consequently, the appellant was acquitted.
Even the revision petitions filed by the State have been dismissed by the learned Sessions Judge.
Accordingly, it is urged that the order of premature retirement which was passed solely on the registration of six criminal cases, is now vitiated in view of the fact that the allegations have been found to be false.
9.
The claim made on behalf of the appellant has been controverted by Mrs. Charu Tuli, the learned counsel appearing for the respondent.
10.
It is the admitted position that the appellant had been placed under suspension on July 5, 1977.
A criminal case was registered against him on July 8, 1977.
It was in pursuance to the First Information Report recorded on July 8, 1977 that six criminal cases were put up in Court for the appellant's trial.
Soon thereafter, within less than a month, the appellant was ordered to be retired by order dated August 4, 1977.
It is, thus, apparent that the appellant was under a cloud.
Before any enquiry could be held and the truth established, the appellant was prematurely retired.
The appointing authority instead of removing the cloud virtually removed the appellant from service.
Was it a camouflage for an order of actual punishment ?
11.
The appellant's personal file including his Confidential Reports are on the record of the trial Court.
A perusal thereof shows that besides various letters of appreciation, the appellant has been adjudged as a `Good' to `Outstanding' official except for certain remarks in the reports for the year 1975-76 and 1976-77 to which reference shall be made presently.
Nothing adverse has been pointed from the appellant's record of service.
So far as the two reports are concerned, it may be mentioned that in the report for the year 1975-76, the reporting officer had described the appellant as very hard working official with good handwriting, intelligent, conversant with rules and accounts work, quick in the despatch of his business, very sweet and cooperative in his manners, punctual, honest with no defects.
It was further observed that "he took special interest in arranging Government functions."
These remarks were endorsed by Mr. Jai Singh, Additional Deputy Commissioner, Amritsar on May 11, 1976.
Thereafter, the following remarks appear to have been recorded by the Deputy Commissioner, Amritsar :  "A complaint has been received against this official and it is being looked into by the ADC.
He is hard working no doubt but at this stage I cannot vouch for as to his reliability.
Sd/-  Deputy Commissioner Amritsar."
12.
These remarks do not bear any date.
It is not clear as to when these remarks were recorded.
Further, there is nothing on record to indicate that any adverse remarks were conveyed to the appellant for the year 1975-76.
13.
The next report relates to the year 1976-77.
So as the prescribed Proforma is concerned, no remarks were recorded against any of the columns.
However, at the back of this Proforma, the following remarks appear :  "He could not impress me with his manner of keeping accounts.
On the other hand serious efforts were made to replace him by a suitable hand, but no suitable person was prepared to take charge from him as everybody was fearing that there might be serious discrepancies in his account.
Even Sh. JD Khanna, IAS, the then Deputy Commissioner, Amritsar, when I explained to him that no suitable person was forthcoming for this job, wrote to the Commissioner, Jullundur to send some suitable person to Amritsar, to be appointed as District Nazir, but the Commissioner, Jalandhar Division expressed his inability to provide any such person.
Ultimately, this official was transferred in April 1977.
The checking of his account has revealed that he has been committing serious irregularities and that he could not account for a large amount.
Account kept by him was also containing serious inaccuracies.
Over all assessment.
Below Average.
Sd/- 29.6.77  SDO(C) Ananla formerly GA to DC Amritsar.
I generally agree with the assessment of GA Enquiries were pending against him which were not finalised at the time when I handed over charge.
Sd/  DC Rupnagar, formerly A.DC Amritsar.
Though looking mild this official is very cunning and tried to involve the senior officers by making all sort of advances towards them and later on blackmailing them.
He was favorite of previous DC Mr. Bedi and a big scandal is doubtful.
Now he is involved in a big embezzlement case which is under investigation.
He is dishonest, cunning and not a reliable person.
Sd/-  Commissioner Jullundur Division (formerly DO Amritsar) 5.10.1977."
14.
A perusal of the above shows that this report had been finalised on October 5, 1977 while the appellant bad already been retired on August 4, 1977.
These remarks were apparently not available to the competent authority before passing the order of premature retirement.
Further, it is also recorded on this report (the identity of the author cannot be established) that "adverse remarks have not been conveyed due to premature retirement of this official."
15.
The factual position as noticed above clearly shows that in the report for the year 1975-76, nothing adverse was noticed against the appellant.
However, the factum of the complaint was recorded at some stage subsequent to the recording of the report.
Thereafter, in the report for the year 1976-77, the reference is only to the appellant's ability to keep accounts and the pendency of the enquiry.
Specific allegations regarding discrepancies in the accounts were levelled.
These matters were obviously under investigation by the police.
Even though, the discrepancies were considered to be serious, there is nothing on record to show that the departmental authorities made any effort to even satisfy themselves with regard to the prima facie truth of falsehood of the alleged discrepancies or irregularities.
Having placed the appellant under suspension, they proceeded to retire him.
Even the report though apparently recorded on June 29, 1977, appears to have been sent by the SDO(C) only on July 22 1977 when the appellant had already been placed under suspension.
It appears to have been received in the office of the Deputy Commissioner, Rupnagar on July 23, 1977.
16.
A perusal of the sequence of events does not indicate that the appellant was considered to be generally unsuitable for continuance in service beyond the age of 55 years.
In fact, his entire record prior to the year 1975-76 who highly complementary.
It appears that it was on account of specific complaint regarding irregularities in accounts that the order of premature retirement was passed.
In such a situation, it appears difficult to hole, that the order was not punitive.
In fact, the sequence of events viz. the suspension, the alleged discrepancies in accounts, the complaint and the case registered Aitif the police clearly point towards the punitive character of the order of premature retirement.
17.
It was also not disputed that in the criminal cases registered against the appellant, nothing has been established against him.
In fact, it appears that in three cases, even the charge could not be framed against him and in the remaining three, it was found that there was no evidence to prove any entrustment or to substantiate the charge.
It appears that the complaint which was mentioned in the report for the year 1975-76 was thus unfounded.
Similarly, even the observations made in the report for the year 1976-77, cannot be said to be well founded as the State could not produce any evidence to prove the charge of embezzlement against the appellant.
The allegations against the appellant having not been established before a judicial Court, the very basis on which the order of premature retirement was sought to be sustained ceases to exist.
In fact, both the Courts had upheld the order of premature retirement only on account of these six cases.
The result of the cases lends support to the plaintiffs claim that the action was totally arbitrary and unfair.
18.
Mrs. Charu Tuli has produced a letter dated October 19, 1990 from the Deputy Commissioner, Amritsar in which it has been inter alia stated that "since Shri Surjit Rai Kapoor stood acquitted in all six cases for mis-appropriation, thus it is not necessary to file reply in the Hon'ble Court, because he has already got full advantage of his service benefits."
A photocopy of this letter is placed on record as Mark `A'.
19.
A perusal of this letter clearly indicates that in view of the appellant's acquittal/discharge from the Court, even the competent authority viz. Deputy Commissioner considered the appellant to be entitled to the service benefits.
20.
In fact, the learned counsel for the appellant points out that by an order of October 18, 1989, the competent authority had released salary for the period during which the appellant had remained under suspension w.e.f.
July 5, 1977 to the date when he was actually retired viz. September 23, 1977.
21.
Taking the totality of the circumstances into consideration.
I am unable to uphold the finding of the Courts below.
It is accordingly reversed.
As a consequence, the judgment and decree passed by the learned Courts below are set aside.
and the suit of the plaintiff-appellant is decreed.
It is declared that the order of his premature retirement Ex. P.3 was illegal.
He will be deemed to have continued in service till the date he attained the age of 58 years, He will be entitled to consequential reliefs in the nature of arrears of salary and revision of retirement benefits, in accordance with law.
22.
The appellant has already crossed the age of 70 years.
Lest even the arrears should become a posthumous award, it is directed that the payment shall be made to him within three months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
No costs.
Order accordingly.