GR Majithia, J - This judgment disposes of Civil Writ Petitions No. 10823 and 10824 of 1988 since common questions of law arise for decision therein.
2.
In these petitions the petitioners have challenged the initiation of proceedings under Rule 7 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment & Appeal) Rules, 1952 (for short, the 1952 Rules), the charge-sheets dated March 19, 1986, the orders dated July 21, 1987 imposing punishment of stoppage of one grade increment with future effect besides recovery of Rs. 1328683 each and the order dated September 7, 1988 dismissing their appeals against orders dated July 21, 1988.
3.
Reference to the relevant has been made from the pleadings of C.W.P.
No. 10283 of 1988:  4.
The petitioner was served with a charge-sheet issued by respondent No. 2 vide Memorandum No. 3-IC-K-84/345/IC-1, dated March 10, 1986.
He denied the allegations made against him and submitted a detailed reply to the charge-sheet.
After consideration of the reply, the punishment as indicated above was imposed.
He challenged the order of imposition of punishment in appeal and the same was rejected by the Government vide their letter No. 8/59/87-6 B&R(W) dated September 7, 1988 as communicated to the petitioner by the Engineer-in-Chief, Haryana, PWD B&R, Chandigarh vide Memo No. 3-IC-K- 84/4725/IC-2, dated September 7, 1988.
5.
The allegations made in the writ petition were controverted in the written statement filed by Sh. SC Saluja, Director, Research and Design, Haryana, P.W.D., B&R Branch, Chandigarh, on behalf of the respondents.
The order imposing punishment was justified.
It was admitted that charge-sheet was served under Rule 7 of the 1952 Rules, but on consideration of the reply to the charge-sheet, a minor punishment was imposed and it was not considered necessary to hold a regular inquiry against the petitioner and issue him a second show-cause notice.
6.
A perusal of Memorandum No. 3-IC-K-84/345/IC-1, dated Match 19, 1986 reveals that the petitioner was informed that action against him under Rule 7 of the 1952 Rules was contemplated and the statement of allegations on the basis of which the show-cause notice was issued was annexed to the Memorandum.
The petitioner submitted his written explanation on June 7, 1986.
The same was duly considered and he was given a personal hearing on May 11, 1987.
After considering his explanation and affording him an opportunity of personal hearing, the punishment of stoppage of one grade increment with future effect, besides recovery of Rs. 13, 28683 was imposed upon him by the Engineer-in-Chief, Haryana, PWD B&R Branch, Chandigarh.
7.
Rule 7 of the 1952 Rules deals with cases where major punishment of dismissal or removal from service or reduction in rank is proposed to be imposed and sub-rule (c) of Rule 7 specifically provides that after the enquiry against a Government servant has been completed and the punishing authority has arrived at a provisional conclusion in regard to the penalty to be imposed, the accused officer shall be supplied with a copy of the report of the enquiring authority and be called upon to show cause against the particular penalty proposed to be inflicted upon him.
Rule 8 says that without prejudice to the provisions of Rule 7, no order under clauses (i), (ii) or (iv) of Rule 4 (viz. censure; withholding of increments or promotion including stoppage at an efficiency bar, if any; or recovery from pay of the whole or part of any pecuniary loss to Government caused by negligence or breach of orders) shall be passed, unless he has been given an adequate opportunity of making any representation that he may desire to make, and such representation has been taken into consideration.
8.
The precise submission which is being urged on behalf of the petitioners is that in the case of a minor punishment, not only the provisions of Rule 8 but also those of Rule 7 have to be followed.
This, in our view, does not flow from a reading of these two provisions.
Rule 8 does not require anything more than that the allegations on the basis of which the officer concerned is charge-sheet should be made known to him and he should be given an opportunity to make any representation with regard to them.
He need not be told the punishment which is sought to be imposed on him either at the time the charge-sheet is served on him or at any other stage.
There is no question of his being given an opportunity a second time after the enquiry is completed in respect of the punishment sought to be imposed on him unlike a case covered by rule 7.
(See in this connection the judgment of the apex Court reported as Shadi Lal Gupta v. State of Punjab, 1973(1) SLR 913).
This is precisely what has been done in the instant case.
Charge-sheet was served upon the petitioner.
He filed a detailed representation to the charge-sheet.
He was afforded opportunity of hearing and thereafter the impugned order imposing the minor punishment was passed.
The action was taken strictly in accordance with the 1952 Rules.
However, a perusal of the order passed by the Motion Bench indicates that it was argued at the time of motion hearing of the writ petition that once an inquiry for a major punishment had been initiated, the punishing authority could give a lesser punishment or a minor punishment without issuing a fresh show cause notice and in support of this submission reliance was placed on a decision of this Court in State of Punjab v. Chodhri Manphul Singh, 1986(1) SLR 484.
In this case, the facts, briefly, were as under :-  9.
Manphul Singh was working as a District Welfare Officer in the year 1975.
A report was called for from him as to whether Amarjit Singh son of Gurnam Singh, resident of Jagraon, belonged to Scheduled Caste or not.
He reported that said Amarjit Singh was Ramdasia by caste and, thus, belonged to Scheduled Caste.
The Deputy Director, Scheduled Castes and Welfare Department, Punjab, enquired into the matter and found that said Amarjit Singh was a Jat Sikh and did not belong to Scheduled Caste, and as such he was wrongly granted admission to MBBS course on the basis of the certificate issued by Manphul Singh, District Welfare Officer.
Manphul Singh was charge-, sheeted.
He filed his reply to the charge-sheet and ultimately his two annual increments with cumulative effect were stopped vide order dated July 26, 1972.
We challenged this order in the civil Court on various grounds.
The Civil Court found that the order of punishment was in violation of Rules 10 and 11 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970.
On appeal, the first appellate Court affirmed the decision of the trial Court.
Dissatisfied with the order of the first appellate Court, the State of Punjab came up in regular second appeal.
At the time of hearing of that appeal, it was submitted that the earlier view that stopping of two increments with cumulative effect was a major punishment was no more good law in view of the Division Bench judgment of this Court in Sarwan Singh v. State of Punjab, C.W.P.
No. 352 of 1984, decided on February 16, 1985, and since no inquiry was required, therefore, the order of stopping two annual increments with cumulative effect was unexceptional and the orders of the Courts below were unsustainable.
The learned Judge in para 5 of the judgment stated that the charge-sheet was issued under Rule 8 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970, which relates to major penalty.
After saying so, he observed thus :-  "It is common case of the parties that an enquiry was contemplated and conducted under sub-rule (3) to Rule 23 of Rule 8.
It may be that in order to inflict minor punishment no enquiry as such may be conducted or is necessary but once, after issuing the charge-sheet under rule 8, the enquiry is held then minor punishment may be imposed as contemplated in clause (3) of rule 9 if the punishing authority so chooses at the time of awarding the punishment instead of the major punishment.
But at the same time once the proceeding has been initiated under rule 8, then for inflicting a minor punishment, the procedure as required under rule 8 has to be followed for awarding a minor punishment under rule 9(3).
In the present case, even this has not been done fully as found by the Courts below."
A reading of these observations indicates that the learned Judge opined that if inquiry under rule 8 had been conducted, there was no bar in imposing a lesser punishment.
What is being construed from these observations is that once it is decided that a lesser punishment be imposed, a fresh show-cause notice be issued and the procedure prescribed for imposition of lesser penalty be followed.
This inference is irrdeucible.
The learned Single Judge has observed that if as a result of inquiry under rule 8 of the 1970 Rules, the competent authority wants to impose a minor punishment, there was no bar to it.
The observation that a minor punishment can be imposed only after following the procedure laid down under Rule 8 of the 1970 Rules cannot be read disconjunctively or divorced from the context in which these were made.
There is no bar for imposing minor punishment although the charge-sheet contemplated major punishment.
Moreover, in the instant case, we are concerned with the interpretation of Rules 7 and 8 of the 1952 Rules and the construction placed by us on the rules has received approval by the apex Court in Shadi Lal Gupta's case (supra).
For the reasons stated above, these petitions are bereft of any merit and are dismissed, but with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.