JL Gupta, J. (Oral) - This order will dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 15508 and 18461 of 1991.
The facts as stated in Civil Writ Petition No. 15508 of 1991 may be briefly noticed.
2.
The petitioner herein is the Rural Development Agency, Hoshiarpur.
It runs Craft Centres for the purpose of imparting training in Tailoring Knitting and Embroidery to the various trainees.
Respondent No. 2 was appointed as a Craft Trainer in the Women Craft Centre.
According to the petitioner, the appointment was made vide letter dated September 25, 1987 a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P.1 with the writ petition.
According to this order, the petitioner had informed the respondent that she "will be entitled to get a consolidated salary of Rs. 600/- only per month fixed.
The duration of the training will be for 9 months only."
On July 4, 1988, the petitioner passed an order by which the respondent was informed that centre was "being closed from 14788 on completion of its duration of 9 months.
You were appointed for the above said Centre only.
Therefore, after 14788 your services are no longer required by this Agency due to closure of Centre.
Therefore, your services are terminated w.e.f.
14788 A.N."
Aggrieved by this order, respondent No. 2 filed Civil Writ petition 658 of 1989 in this Court.
It appears that notice of motion was issued to the respondent in the said writ petition.
Thereafter, the Division Bench vide its order dated September 21, 1989 "dismissed" the petition.
The respondent then approached the Labour Court.
By its award dated June 4, 1992, the learned Labour Court held that the respondent is a workman and that she "had put in more than 240 days of service under the respondent continuously.
It was incumbent upon the respondent, to comply with the mandatory provisions of Section 25-F of the Act.....
But the same has not been done by the Respondent.
Non-compliance of mandatory provision of the Act makes the termination null and void."
As a result, directions for reinstatement of the workman" with continuity of service and full back wages from the date of reference i.e. 10th May, 1990 till reinstatement" were given.
The petitioner is aggrieved by the order of the learned Labour Court inasmuch as the directions for reinstatement and payment of back wages from the date of reference have been issued.
Civil Writ Petition No. 18461 of 1991 has been filed by the workman, viz. respondent No. 2 in this petition, with a prayer that back wages from the date of termination viz. July 14, 1988 should have been granted.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has challenged the award primarily on the ground that the respondent having been appointed for a fixed term of nine months and the services having been terminated as a result of the expiry of the term of appointment, the petitioner cannot be said to have retrenched the respondent.
As such, the provisions of Section 25-F of the Act were not at all attracted.
It is also claimed that the respondent being a teacher was, in fact, not a workman and that the writ petition having been dismissed by this Court after hearing both the sides, the claim as made before the learned Labour Court was barred by the principle of resjudicata.
On the other hand, Mr. Chopra, learned counsel for the respondent No. 2 in this case and the petitioner in Civil Writ Petition No. 18461 of 1991, claims that the respondent had been appointed as a skilled worker and that, in fact, she had been continuing in service since July 2, 1981.
As such, it is not a case where the services had been terminated at the expiry of the original term of appointment.
In fact, the respondent had worked for a period of more than 7 years.
He further states that various persons, junior to the workman, had been retained in service and the action of the petitioner in terminating her services has been rightly set aside by the learned Labour Court.
4.
Detailed additional affidavits have also been filed by both sides.
In the affidavit filed on behalf of the respondent, it has been inter alia pointed out that she had worked for different periods of time since July, 1981.
On the basis thereof, it has been pointed out that the respondent had worked for a period of 5 years, 6 months and 11 days, i.e. from July 81 to July, 1988.
It has also been pointed out that certain other persons similarly recruited have been allowed to continue while the services of the present workman have been terminated.
In the affidavit filed on behalf of the petitioner it has been mentioned that the Craft Trainers/Teachers for Women Crafts Centres are appointed under a scheme for the training of rural youth for self-employment.
This scheme is financed by the Central Government and the Punjab State Government.
The number of Training Centres are reduced when the financial grants are reduced by both these governments.
It has been mentioned that in the year 1981-82 there were as many as 36 Women Crafts Centres in District Hoshiarpur.
By the year 1987-88, the number of Centres have been reduced to only 11.
It has been further pointed out that this number has undergone a steady reduction in the subsequent years.
Reference has also been made to the writ petition filed by respondent No. 2 wherein it has been claimed that she was not covered by the definition of Retrenchment in view of Section 2(oo)(by) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
It has also been mentioned that in the written statement, besides claiming that the respondent was not a workman, it had been pleaded that her work was not satisfactory and as such she had no right to continue in service.
With regard to the claim of the respondent that various persons junior to her are being allowed to continue, it has been mentioned that no seniority list whatsoever is being maintained by the petitioner and appointments are made only in accordance with the availability of the posts.
It has been further averred that the work and conduct of Smt. Garo Devi, Smt. Paramjit Kaur etc. was found to be satisfactory and there was no complaint against the petitioner.
On this premises, is claimed that the action was neither arbitrary nor unfair.
5.
The short question that arises for consideration in this case is as to whether or not the petitioner had retrenched the respondent.
Retrenchment has been defined in section 2(oo).
In the large context, it includes termination for any reason whatsoever.
By the Act of 1984, certain exceptions have been provided.
It has been inter alia provided that "termination of the service of the workman as a result of the non-renewal of the contract of employment between the employer and the workman concerned on its expiry or of such contract being terminated under the stipulation in that behalf...." does not amount to retrenchment.
What is the position in the present case ?
6.
A perusal of the order dated September 25, 1987 shows that the petitioner was categorically informed that "the duration of the training will be for 9 months only."
It is at the expiry of 9 months, on July 14, 1988 when the centre was closed that her services were terminated.
The petitioner was unable to appoint the respondent thereafter.
May be that the petitioner was reluctant to appoint the respondent in view of the fact that there was a complaint against her during the period of her service with the Centre.
A copy of the complaint dated February 10, 1988 has been produced as Annexure P.6 with the additional affidavit.
In such a situation, I am unable to hold that the action of the petitioner in not renewing the contract of service amounted to retrenchment.
That being so, the provision of Section 25-F of the Act had no application at all.
Thus the question of violation thereof does not arise.
Nor am I satisfied that the action is vitiated only because certain persons junior to the respondent No. 2 were allowed to continue.
If the work of the respondent was not found to be entirely satisfactory, while the performance of the juniors was assessed to be better, the action in terminating the services of the respondent-workman is not violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Reference in this behalf has been made to the decision in State of UP & Another v. KK Shukla, 1991(1) RSJ 659.
7.
Accordingly, the awarded of the learned Labour Court dated June 4, 1991 is set aside.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Civil Writ Petition No. 15508 of 1991 having been allowed and the award having been set aside.
Civil Writ Petition No. 18461 of 1991 becomes wholly redundant.
It is accordingly dismissed.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.