Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner, a Lieutenant Colonel in the Indian Army, claims that he has not been considered for promotion to the rank of Acting Colonel in accordance with law.
This claim has not only been controverted in the written statement filed by the respondents, but is also belied by the record produced by Mr. Ashutosh Mohunta, learned counsel for the respondents.
A few facts relevant for the decision of the case may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner was commissioned in the Indian Army in the year 1963.
It is averred that he was promoted to the rank of substantive Lt. Col. in the year 1983.
The petitioner alleges that the "Initiating Officer somehow became inimical towards the petitioner" and recorded unsatisfactory annual confidential report for the year 1985-86.
Vide order dated July 20, 1987 a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-1, the report was set aside.
It is further averred that the petitioner's name was being considered for promotion as substantive Colonel.
As a result of the adverse report for the year 1985-86, the petitioner was not approved for promotion.
It is further alleged that the officer who had given an adverse report to the petitioner for the year 1985-86 also initiated his report for the year 1986-87.
The petitioner's representation (statutory complaint) against this report was partially accepted and the assessment of the Initiating Officer in respect of the petitioner was expunged vide order a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-7.
3.
The petitioner avers that he filed CWP No. 5023 of 1989 during the pendency of his representation.
This writ petition was disposed by the Motion Bench vide order dated July 18, 1989 with the following observations :-  "It is accepted in the written statement that the case of the petitioner for promotion as Acting Colonel is under consideration of the respondents.
Having gone through the pleadings, we are of the opinion that since this consideration has been denied to the petitioner for quite long, the respondents be directed to complete this process of consideration within a period of two months from today and dispose of his case by passing a speaking order.
We order accordingly."
4.
The petitioner further submits that his case for promotion to the rank of Acting Colonel was to be considered in September 1989.
It came to his notice that the ACR for the year 1984-85 was not being taken into consideration as he had availed of Furlough leave for 30 days.
Consequently, according to the petitioner, he moved an application dated August 30, 1989 for conversion of 30 days Furlough into annual leave so that the ACR for the year 1984-85 could be considered as a full report for 12 months.
This application for conversion was accepted and necessary relief was granted to the petitioner vide order dated September 19, 1989.
In the meantime the respondents instead of waiting for the decision on his representation for conversion of Furlough into annual leave passed an order declaring him unsuitable for promotion.
This order was conveyed to the petitioner vide letter dated September 16, 1989.
The petitioner claims that the action of the respondents in declaring him unsuitable is illegal as in view of the order dated September 19, 1989 the ACR for the year 1984-85 could not be taken to be for a period of 11 months.
It is further averred that the report for the year 1985-86 having been set aside "could also not been taken into account".
He claims that the assessment of the Initiating Officer for the year 1986-87 having been expunged and in view of the order dated September 19, 1989, passed by the Central Govt. "the ACR for the year 1984-85 has become full ACR and as such, the petitioner is now sure to be selected for promotion to the rank of Colonel on the basis of his ACR for the year 1984-85."
It has been further averred that even in the report for the year 1986-87, the remarks of the Initiating Officer having been expunged, "all other remarks pertaining to that ACR by higher authorities like RO/SRO automatically, fell to the ground, as all other higher authorities, if (sic), their remarks on the assessment of (sic).
On these premises, the petitioner claims that the order dated September 16, 1989 declaring him unfit for promotion be quashed and the respondents be directed to reconsider his claim.
5.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been admitted that the report for the year 1985-86 had been set aside by the Chief of the Army Staff.
It has been further admitted that in the report for the year 1986-87 the Central Govt. had set aside the assessment of the Initiating officer.
The respondents aver that in pursuance to the orders dated July 18, 1989 the respondents had to decide the petitioner's case for promotion within two months.
"In compliance of the directions of this Hon'ble Court the petitioner was given Special Review Consideration for promotion to the acting rank of colonel.
The petitioner has been considered with his service record upto ACR 1984-85.
After careful consideration of the record profile of the officer, the central Govt. has approved the grading 'Z' (unfit) regarding his promotion to the rank of Colonel."
It has been further pointed out that after the ACR for the year 1985-86 had been set aside, the petitioner was given Special Review (fresh) in November 1987 with ACR for the year 1986-87.
The petitioner filed a replication reiterating his claim.
An additional written statement was filed on behalf of the respondents.
It has been pointed out that the petitioner's claim was considered in August 1986, November 1987, December 1988 and he was found to be unfit for promotion.
Thereafter the petitioner's claim was again considered for promotion as Special Review in January 1990 when he was found to be unfit for promotion.
He was given final review in May 1990 and was again found to be unfit for promotion.
6.
When the case came up before me for hearing learned counsel for the petitioner contended that the petitioner's claim had not been considered in accordance with law after the passing of the order dated September 19, 1989 (Annexure P-10) to the writ petition.
This claim was controverted by the learned counsel for the respondents.
Vide my orders dated August 30, 1991 and November 13, 1991, the respondents were directed to file an affidavit explaining the factual position.
An affidavit of Capt.
Gurmeet Singh was filed.
In this affidavit it has been explained that the order dated September 19, 1989 pertains to the conversion of the petitioner's annual leave into Furlough leave and vice versa and that it did not (sic) the performance profile record of the petitioner and, as such, had no impact on the selection process.
The factual position with regard to the consideration of the petitioner's claim on different version has been reiterated.
The petitioner filed a counter affidavit averring that the statement made in the affidavit filed on behalf of the respondents was false and that in fact no consideration had taken place in accordance with law.
7.
I have heard Mr. Manohar Lal for the petitioner and Mr. Ashutosh Mohunta for the respondents.
8.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the respondents were bound to consider the petitioner's claim for promotion to the rank of Acting Colonel in accordance with law.
He submits that initially the petitioner's report for the year 1984-85 was ignored as it was not for the full year.
It was only on September 19, 1989 that the decision to convert his Furlough into annual leave and to treat the report for the year 1984-85 as a report for the full year had been taken.
However, the respondents had rejected his claim for promotion prior thereto and the order was conveyed to the petitioner vide letter dated September 16, 1989.
On this premises, the learned counsel submits that the order dated September 19, 1989 cannot be said to have been taken into consideration by the respondents.
This, the learned counsel submits, vitiates the order dated September 16, 1989.
The claim has been controverted by the learned counsel for the respondents.
Mr. Mohunta has also shown to me the original file regarding the consideration of the petitioner's claim for promotion.
9.
For the consideration of the contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner, it is apt to notice the order dated September 19, 1989 passed by the Govt. of India.
By this order annual leave of 2 days viz. April 6 and 7, 1984 taken by the petitioner was converted into Furlough leave and the Furlough of 30 days from December 27, 1984 to January 25, 1985 converted into annual leave.
Under the instructions issued by the authorities, the period of annual leave is not excluded from consideration but that during which an officer is on Furlough, is not taken into account.
In Army jargon, it is said that the officer has not "adequately exercised".
Since the petitioner had remained on 30 day Furlough during the year 1984-85, the report, in accordance with the instructions could not be taken into account as the officer had not "adequately exercised".
On conversion of Furlough into annual leave, the impediment regarding "adequately exercised" vanished.
As a result, the report for the year 1984-85 was to be considered as a report for the full year.
Mr. Manohar Lal's grievance is that his claim for promotion was not considered by taking the report for the year 1984-85 into consideration.
This has not only been denied by the respondents but is even not borne out from the record of the case.
10.
The proceedings of the Selection Board are required to be forwarded to the Central Govt.
It appears from the recorded that after the directions of this Court, the petitioner's case was examined and forwarded to the Ministry of Defence.
A photocopy of the office noting in the Ministry of Defence, which appears to have been approved by the RRM (presumably Rajya Raksha Mantri) on September 15, 1989 shows that the report for the year 1984-85 has been taken into consideration and the recommendation of the Selection Board grading the petitioner as 'unfit' for promotion was upheld.
This nothing is placed on the record as Mark 'A'.
A perusal thereof shows that the petitioner's report for the year 1984-85 has been taken into consideration.
In view of this, the claim made on behalf of the petitioner that he was bound to be found suitable if his report for the year 1984-85 was taken into consideration, cannot be sustained.
11.
Mr. Manohar Lal, however, contends that the authorities were bound to consider the order dated September 19, 1989.
I find no merit in this contention.
The order by itself did not require the reconsideration of the petitioner's claim.
It only granted the conversion of Furlough into annual leave.
However, the result of this order was, as already noticed, that the petitioner was to be treated as "adequately exercised" during the year 1984-85.
As a result, the report for the said year had to be considered as that for the full year and was to be taken into consideration while considering his suitability for promotion.
This appears to have been done by the respondents.
There was no magic in the order.
Its consequence, I find, has duly been complied with.
In such a situation, I am not persuaded to hold that there was any illegality in the consideration of petitioner's claim or that the respondents are required to reconsider the matter.
12.
The rules and instructions issued by the appropriate authorities lay down a detailed procedure for consideration of the claims of officers for promotion.
The compute prints show the performance of the officer under different heads to enable the Selection Boards to Judge the suitability for promotion.
Nothing has been pointed out to show that the prescribed procedure was not followed or that there was violation of any rule or instruction.
Otherwise, the writ court does not function as a court of appeal in matters of consideration of claims of officers for promotion.
It is the function of the appropriate Selection Boards.
In the case of officers from the Defence Services, the Court is all the more reluctant as the needs and standards are fairly different from those applicable to civil posts.
Accordingly, I find no merits in the writ petition.
It is dismissed with costs.
Petition dismissed.