Ashok Bhan, J - This judgment will dispose of C.W.P.
No. 11929 of 1991 and COCP No. 1186 of 1991 as a common question of law and facts is involved in both the cases.
2.
Grain is hydrospheric commodity by nature.
It takes and gives out moisture under the conditions of atmospheric changes.
During the process, there may be loss or gain in weight.
Loss/gain during storage of food grains has become an important aspect today as trade and handling agencies seem to be conscious of monetary loss/gain due to the change in weight of the food grains during storage.
Food and Supplies Department of the State of Punjab is trading as well as handling agency in food grains and being conscious of monetary loss/gain as a result of loss/gain in weight of the food grains has fixed certain norms for effecting recovery and allowing allowance for different years in respect of paddy/rice and wheat.
The persons incharge of all the godowns i.e. Inspectors/Sub Inspectors of the Food and Supplies Department were made the officials responsible.
They were given the credit of 2% loss in the weight of paddy/rice and were made liable for the gain of 15% of weight in the case of wheat.
In this case we are concerned with the gain in weight in wheat due to moisture while in storage.
3.
The facts giving rise to the present writ petition are as under :-  4.
Petitioner No. 1 is a union of which Assistant Food and Supplies Officers and Inspectors of Food and Supplies of the Food and Supplies Department, Punjab and members.
Petitioner No. 2 is the President of the said Union.
The present writ petition has been filed by the Union in a representative capacity on behalf of the members of the Union and by petitioner No. 2 in his official capacity as President of the said Union, who has been duly authorised to file the present petition on behalf of petitioner No. 1.
State of Punjab purchases wheat from the Markets/Village purchase centres at the time of harvest and stores it for subsequent supplies to the Food Corporation of India for the central pool.
The supervisory functions of storage of wheat are entrusted to Assistant Food and Supplies Officers/District Food and Supplies Controllers and Deputy Directors.
The case of the petitioners is that wheat suffers a certain percentage of loss both qualitatively and quantitatively during storage due to various reasons.
Some of the factors responsible for storage losses have been mentioned as under :-  (i) Moisture;  (ii) Pests & Animals  (iii) Spillages  (iv) Pilferage  (v) Different apparatus and weighment.
(vi) Different percentages of weighment.
(vii) Storage Structure.
(viii) Period of Storage.
(ix) Gunny Bags; and  (x) Rains.
and, therefore, recovery of assumed gain in weight of wheat should not be recovered from the staff.
Petitioners have relied upon a report of Dr. PK Srivastava, Officer Incharge of Indian Grain Storage Institute, Field Station, Punjab Agricultural, University Campus, Ludhiana, circulated under the heading.
"The Post Harvest System of Food Grain in the Developing Countries."
On page 14 of the said report the losses in the weight of wheat at different stages was established as follows by the Indian Grain and Storage Institute (for short referred to as IGSI)  (i) Loss in grinding of wheat : 043%  (ii) Redunt (loss caused by rodents) during storage : 241%  (iii) Loss during transportation : 016%  (iv) Loss in Mandi level : 068%  (v) Loss during storage : 410%  (vi) Driage loss during storage : 219% to 238%  Petitioners also mad a reference to the papers circulated at International Warehousing Conference, Vigyan Bhavan, New Delhi, by the Central Warehousing Corporation under the heading "Factors responsible for storage losses" a review held by Shri PC Vishwambran, Joint Manager (Technical), Central Warehousing Corporation.
In this paper quantitative losses of food-grains during storage have been discussed in detail.
Annexure P/1 has been attached with the writ petition which is a notification issued by the Governor of Punjab on 23121958, under Section 34(3) of the Punjab Warehousing Act in which it has been notified that warehouse-man shall not be responsible for the loss of weight for bulk by drying or shrinkage or gain in weight or bulk by absorption of moisture specified in Appendix 'A' to these rules.
Appendix 'B' to these rules deals with the percentage of gain in weight due to absorption of moisture.
Petitioners did not attach Appendix 'B' of the rules with the writ petition.
Petitioners also relied upon Provincial Reserve Account Manual Part-II of the Punjab Govt. which deals with shortage in storages of wheat/rice etc as well.
5.
The respondents-State has been issuing instructions from year to year since 1972 for the accountable of the increase in weight due to increase of moisture contents in wheat and members of the petitioners' association working at the storage duties have been accounting for according to the norms fixed for respective crop years from time to time.
For the year 1987-88, vide Annexure P/5 dated 14/1571987, the department laid down the following norms of realisation of the gain in wheat due to moisture content :-  (1) For Godowns 15%  (2) For Open 10%  (3) For bins/Khatti 05%  It was laid down in the said order that any official not giving the excess as per the said prescribed norms would be liable for recoveries.
The mode of effecting recoveries as mentioned in the said letter was that if an official was found not giving excess as per prescribed norm and if the amount involved was less than Rs. 1000/- per individual, the same shall be recovered by the District Food and Supplies Controller at the district level.
Where the value of less excess was more that Rs. 1000/-, the same was be referred to the Head Office.
The petitioners challenged the said order (Annexure P/5) in this Court by way of filing CWP 8117 of 1989 on the ground that there was no legitimate norm for realisation of excess and, therefore, laying down of norms for realisation of excess and the guidelines for recovery of less excess from the employees were without jurisdiction and arbitrary being not warranted by any statutory provisions of law or any government instructions and the scientific conclusions based upon the detailed studies.
The writ petition was admitted to hearing.
The application regarding stay was heard by a learned Single Judge of this Court.
The point raised on behalf of the petitioners was that until and unless the petitioners were found to have embezzled the wheat or were negligent in the discharge of their duties, they could not be made liable for any shortage, occurred; that no amount could be deducted from the salaries of the employees unless they were given a show cause notice/charge sheet and then an order passed after giving them an opportunity of hearing.
6.
On the other hand the case of the respondents is that the State Govt. had come to a conclusion based on scientific data that there is bound to be gain in weight due to moisture in wheat stock during storage and that the petitioners were responsible to account for the same; that if the petitioners failed to account for the same the State was within its right to proceed in accordance with law i.e. Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeals) Rules, 1970 (hereinafter referred as the 1970 Rules).
After hearing the parties, the learned Single Judge ordered that the respondent-State would be at liberty to continue passing the orders determining the liability in accordance with law but without effecting the actual recoveries.
7.
On 2761990, respondents-State file an affidavit (Annexure P/8) attached with the writ petition informing the Court that instructions Annexure P/5 have been withdrawn (regarding mode of recovery) and the respondents-State shall proceed against the defaulting officials under due process of law in accordance with 1970 Rules.
CWP 8117 of 1989 was finally disposed of by Amarjeet Chaudhary, J on 22.1.1991, in the following terms :-  "I have considered the respective stand of the learned counsel for the parties.
After giving consideration to the entire matter, I am of the view that no action against the petitioner can be taken on the basis of the impugned guidelines, Annexure P-5 since the same stand withdrawn by the Government.
However, it is made clear that the State will be at liberty to proceed against the defaulting officials under the law and in accordance with Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970.
The writ petition is dismissed having become infructuous with no order as to costs."
8.
After the dismissed of the writ petition, respondents-State issued recovery notices which were based on the orders passed by the respondents-State on enquiry conducted under the 1970 Rules.
Copies of such recovery notices have been attached as Annexure P/11.
Since the instructions Annexure P/5 had been withdrawn which were for the year 1987-88, fresh instructions were issued for realisation of excess on wheat stock stored in godowns copy of which has been attached as Annexure P/19.
Similarly instructions were issued pertaining to the year 1991-92 copy of which has been attached as Annexure P/20.
Excess percentage was fixed as under for the respective years :-  1987-88  1) Godown 15%  2) Open 1%  3) Bin/Khatti 05%  1991-92  1) Godown 15%  2) Open 10%  3) Bins/Khatti 1/2%  9.
Petitioners have filed the present writ petition challenging the action of the respondents-State in issuing the instructions Annexure P/19 for the year 1987-92, inter alia on the ground that the respondents are estopped by their conduct as the guidelines Annexure P/5 had been withdrawn and CWP 8117/1989 has been dismissed as infructuous and as such the respondents-State was estopped by its conduct to revive the norms laid down in Annexure P/5 and passing fresh orders as Annexures P/19 and P/20 for the year 1987-88 and 1991-92, that the norms of realisation of excess due to gain in the weight of the wheat is not warranted by any reasonable scientific criteria or any statutory provisions of law; that the order was unjust, arbitrary and colourable exercise of powers having been passed with mala fide intention; that no recovery could be effected from the members of the petitioners Union on the basis of illegal norms laid down which were in contravention of the government policy; that no recovery from the salaries of the members of the petitioners' Union could be made without following the procedure prescribed in 1970 Rules.
10.
As against this, the stand taken by the respondents-State is that petitioner No. 1 is not a registered body and as such is not legally competent to file the writ petition on behalf of the individual Inspectors Food and Supplies/Assistant Food and Supplies Officers; it was denied that the wheat suffers a loss both quantitatively and qualitatively during the storage.
There cannot be any losses in the wheat if the staff posted on storage duty applies the fumigants, treat the stocks with medicines and remains vigilant for the health of the stock.
The question in this writ petition involved is not regarding the losses caused in weight of wheat due to my rodents, birds and insects etc, the question involved in this petition is with regard to the gain in weight of the stocks of wheat by virtue of moisture contents; that the recoveries are being effected after following the procedure laid down under the 1970 Rules.
The petitioners were given notices to show-cause under the rules as to why recovery be not effected from them.
Some of the petitioners were associated with the enquiry and filed the replies; some of them did not join the proceedings after filing the reply; that in any case the impugned orders Annexure P11 passed were in accordance with law under 1970 Rules; that petitioners instead of availing the alternate remedy by way of appeal against the said orders have come to this Court directly and as such the writ petition is not maintainable because the petitioners have failed to avail of the alternate remedy.
On merits, it was stated that various institutions of repute had conducted the experiments which shows that there was a weight gain in wheat stocks when it was stored and loss of weight in the case of paddy/rice.
Wherever there was a loss of weight in the case of paddy/rice the persons incharge of storage were given due credit of such loss and wherever there was gain in weight in wheat under storage, the persons incharge of the storage were asked to account for the excess from year to year.
Accountal of increased of weight in wheat due to moisture contents has been a regular phenomena observed through experience of storage of wheat for several years past and the members of the petitioners association working at the storage duties have been accounting for the increase in weight according to the norms fixed for respective crop years from time to time; the reason for withdrawal of instructions Annexure P/5 was that in Annexure P/5 apart from fixing the percentage of gain in weight of wheat when stored, which remained the same as per the previous years, the government had also fixed the mode of recovery i.e. the District Food and Supplies Controller could recover an amount upto Rs. 1000/- on account of weight gain and if the amount was more than Rs. 1000/- then the case was to be referred to the Head Office which was not in accordance with the provisions of 1970 Rules.
Instructions Annexure P/19 for the year 1987-88 and Annexure P/20 for the year 1991-92 were issued retaining the same norms regarding the percentage of gain in weight of wheat, that withdrawal of instructions Annexure P/5 envisaged that while processing the cases of delinquent officials not accounting for the excess gains, the same shall be examined under due process of law and in accordance with 1970 Rules.
It was denied that any policy was laid down for the first time in 1987 for the accountal of weight gain in the shortage of wheat and that the same was made operative retrospectively for the years 1981, 1982, 1983 and 1984 onward; that the policy for the accountal of weight gain in storage of wheat is in existence right from the year 1972 and the respondent Government has been issuing instructions laying down the norms for the accountal of weight gain or every crop year separately.
The respondents have also attached Annexure R/1 a document with C.M.
No. 1355 of 1992, wherein it is shown that officials posted on storage duty have been accounting for the weight gain normally on the basis of instructions issued from time to time; that the percentage of loss/gain prescribed for paddy/rice and wheat from time to time is based on scientific studies and factual observations by various committees constituted for this purpose from time to time.
11.
I have heard the learned counsel for the petitioners at great length and I do not find any force in this writ petition.
12.
Mr. SS Nijjar, Senior Advocate, appearing for the petitioners, had laid down the main emphasis on the point that instructions Annexure P/5 (incidentally which were also attached as Annexure P/5 in CWP 8117 of 1987) were withdrawn by the respondents and as such the norms fixed for the accountal of excess were withdrawn and, thereafter, the government could not issue instructions Annexures P/19 and P/20 for the recovery of the excess due to gain in weight in wheat; that the basis of recovery in Annexures P/19 and P/20 is the same on which the instructions contained in Annexure P/5 were based that Annexure P/5 having been withdrawn the petitioners withdrew their CWP 8117 of 1989 and for that reason also, the State Govt. was estopped from issuing the instructions Annexures P/19 and P/20.
I do not find any substance in this submission.
According to the instructions Annexure P/5.
District Food and Supplies Controllers could recover an amount upto Rs. 1000/- on account of weight gain if the official put up on storage duty failed to recover the excess in government's records.
This penal clause was not in accordance with the provisions of 1970 Rules.
Withdrawal of instructions Annexure P/5 envisaged that while processing the cases of delinquent officials not accounting for the excess gain, be examined under due process of law and in accordance with the 1970 Rules.
This Court dismissed CWP 8117 of 1989 as infructuous leaving it open to the respondents to proceed against the officials in accordance with 1970 Rules.
In the interim order dated 28.8.1989 Annexure P/6 passed by MS Liberhan, J as well, it was specifically made clear that the respondents would be at liberty to continue passing orders in accordance with the 1970 Rules but without effecting the actual recovery.
Respondents-State after realising that recoveries from the defaulting officials could be effected only after adopting proper procedure as laid down in 1970 Rules, withdrew the instructions Annexure P/5 which had been issued with a stipulation that the recovery amounting upto Rs. 1000/- should be effected from the defaulting officials by the District Food and Supplies Controllers and the recoveries in excess of Rs. 1000/- to be referred to the head-office.
Since the recovery up to Rs. 1000/- to be effected by the District Food and Supplies Controllers were not considered in accordance with 1970 Rules, the instructions Annexure P/5 were withdrawn which pertained to the year 1987-88 only.
With the written statement respondents-State attached various instructions issued for various crop-years from year to year for the accountal of gain in weight.
Instructions Annexure P/5 only refer to the norms fixed for the year 1987-88 only.
The word 'continuation' used with regard to the instructions Annexure P/5 means that norms had been fixed by the respondent-authorities for various crop years in the past and all these instructions from time to time related too different crop years.
It is incorrect to say that prior to instructions contain in Annexure P/5, there were no norms.
In fact the process for accounting for wheat gain due to moisture started in the earlier part of 1970s decade.
In clause (i) of Annexure P/5, it is specifically mentioned that norms of excess will remain the same as per the last year i.e. 1-1/2% in the covered godowns, 1% for the CAP storage and 1/2% for the Bins/Khattis.
This again shows that norms had been fixed by the State for the earlier years as well.
Since the instructions Annexure P/5, which were for the year 1977-78 only were withdrawn, the respondents-State issued Annexures P/19 and P/20 fixing norms for the years 1987-88 and 1991-92 and, therefore, it is mentioned that the norms for these two years remained the same as in the instructions Annexure P/5.
Therefore, a reference is made to the instructions issued on 14/1571987, Annexure P/5.
In Annexure P/19, there is no mention that recovery amounting to any particular amount shall be made by the District Food and Supplies Controller or otherwise.
The only thing mentioned is that "action against officials giving less excess than the norms will be taken" which amounts to the action following the process of law and in accordance with 1970 Rules.
13.
In the interim order Annexure P/6 passed by the learned Single Judge in CWP 8117 of 1989 the respondents were granted liberty to continue passing orders regarding recoveries under the Rules but without effecting actual recoveries.
According to the final judgment in the said writ petition, the learned Single Judge while disposing of the writ petition ordered that the respondents will effect the recoveries only under the process of law, that is 1970 rules.
The respondents issued show-cause notices to the delinquent officials under the 1970 Rules for various years.
Some of the petitioners filed their replies.
Personal hearing was given to the officials before the final orders were passed.
After hearing the delinquent official whosoever presented himself before the Prescribed Authority, the final orders were passed.
Orders Annexures P/11 to P/18 pertain to the various years ie 1983-84, 1984-85, 1985-86 and 1986-87 issued in pursuance to the recovery orders passed under 1970 Rules specifying the amount determined under those orders to be payable by the delinquent officials.
The petitions did not attach the orders passed under the 1970 Rules but only attached the recovery notices which were issued in pursuance to the orders passed under the 1970 Rules.
Some of the officials against whom the orders have been passed under the 1970 Rules have filed appeals under the appeal rules and others left the matter at that stage only and thus the orders made under 1970 Rules became conclusive.
One of the preliminary objections of the State taken in the written statement was that the petitioners failed to avail of the alternate remedy by way of appeal and hence the writ petition be not entertained.
Since the writ petition has been pending and the matter has been argued at length, I am not dismissing the writ petition on the ground of alternative remedy available but all the same express the view that since the order had been passed by this Court in CWP 8117 of 1989 that the respondents would proceed in accordance with law under 1970 Rules then the petitioners in all fairness should have exhausted their remedy by way of appeal against the orders passed under the 1970 Rules.
In this petition, the petitioners attached Annexures P/11 to P/19 the recovery notices issued to them in pursuance to the orders passed under the 1970 Rules.
It is regrettable that they did not attach the basic orders which had been passed by the authorities under the 1970 Rules.
The respondents-State had given an undertaking in the earlier writ petition (CWP 8117 of 1989) that they would proceed in accordance with law under 1970 Rules and have thus passed the appropriate orders.
The respondents gave ample opportunities to the petitioners before passing the orders under the 1970 Rules.
14.
Mr. ML Sarin, Advocate General, appearing on behalf of Punjab State, produced the orders passed under 1970 Rules by the respondents-State against various officials incharge of the storage.
I have perused those orders and find that the same had been passed in accordance with the principles of natural justice and that the officials have been given proper opportunity to show-cause as well as hearing wherever availed of.
The orders passed under the 1970 Rules are detailed orders.
I am not expressing any view on merits in those cases at this stage because some of the officials have filed appeals against the said orders and it shall be for the appellate authority to decide the matter in appeal.
15.
The next contention raised by the learned counsel appearing for the petitioners is that there is no scientific study showing that there could be a gain in weight of the stored wheat and in the alternative even if there was any variation in the weight in wheat due to moistute then the percentage of gain in weight had been arbitrarily fixed.
His further contention is that certain commodities suffered loss quantitatively and qualitatively during storage.
As against this, the case of the respondent is that paddy/rice loses weight during storage to the tune of 2% for which due credit is given to the staff incharge of the storage whereas in the case of wheat, there is gain in weight which varies as to whether the same has been stored in a godown or on open plinths, which are covered by polythene sheets and accordingly norms have been fixed from year to year and accordingly the persons incharge of the storage are to account for the gain in weight in wheat.
Petitioners have quoted certain studies in support of the contention that there are losses on account of shortage in the weight of wheat stored.
They have referred to the studies regarding loss of weight in wheat due to various factors as pests and animals, spillages, pilferage, different apparatus of weighment, different percentage of weighment, storage structure etc. but the question which is mainly relevant is regarding gain in weight on account of moisture.
Respondents give due credit for the loss in weight in case of paddy and rice to the tune of 2% to the official incharge of the storage.
Respondents have quoted in extenso report of Dr. PK Srivastava which shows that wheat in Northern India gains in weight because it has harvested at a very low moisture and gains moisture during the rainy season.
Similarly India Grain Storage Institute, Hapur (UP) also conducted experiments on the storage of wheat and the result was published in April 1984 copy of which is attached as Annexure R/2.
Weight gain in wheat at Food Corporation of India godown, Hapur was 218 per cent and 1.34 per cent in stack 5 and 237 per cent in stack II.
A departmental committee was also constituted to study the weight gain during storage.
The committee recorded its findings.
The report of the committee has been placed as Annexure R/3.
The inspectors staff posted at those places was associated by this committee.
The above quoted authority clearly shows that the wheat gains weight in storage because of the moisture contents.
Most of the inspectorate staff posted at the storage has been accounting for the gain in weight as per prescribed norms.
The respondents have categorically stated that while fixing the norms for the accountal of wheat gain, all factors including the various studies conducted by various studies conducted by various authorities were taken into consideration and, thereafter, the norms were fixed.
16.
In this petition we are not concerned with the other factors due to which there may be shortage such as the damage caused to the crops or to the grains by rodents, in its transportation or for any other reason which have been referred to by the petitioner in the writ petition.
These factors would not be reckonable factors in determining the amount of loss/gain in weight due to moisture in wheat in storage.
Moreover, the petitioners have to plead before the authorities and prove before them that shortage has occurred in wheat due to its having been eaten away be rodents, in transportation or for any other reason; that they were not given proper facilities for storage of the grains and enough and proper pesticides to fight the menace of rodents or for the transportation of grains from one place to another were not provided to them.
As stated above, we are only concerned in this petition with the gain/loss in weight in grains due to moisture.
The respondents-State is giving due credit to the person incharge of the storage for the loss in weight of paddy/rice due to moisture during storage.
This also shows that the action of the respondents is fair and bona fide because wherever there is a loss in weight in grains, due credit is given to the persons in charge of the storage.
17.
The next contention raised by the learned counsel appearing for the petitioners was that the government itself has issued a notification, issued under Section 34(3) of the Punjab Warehousing Act fixing the percentage of shortage in the warehouses in the stocks of wheat.
The said notification has been issued under the Punjab Warehousing Act, 1957 which deals with licensees with private warehouses.
Section 15 deals with the deterioration of goods during storage and the rule making authority in exercise of its powers under Section 34 has framed certain rules.
It does not deal with the gain/loss of weight in wheat during storage due to moisture.
Moreover, the above mentioned Act would not govern the inspectorate staff of the Food and Supplies Department of the respondents-State incharge of storage of wheat/paddy.
Counsel for the petitioners then referred to para 124 of PR Manual issued by the State of Punjab in the year 1949 showing that there is a shortage of weight in wheat in various months of the year.
Petitioners have attached copy of para 124 of the PR Manual as Annexure P/2.
This Court sent for the original and examined the PR Manual.
If translated paras 123 and 124 the same would read as under :-  "123.
Reports which are correct and complete should be arranged according to Provincial Centres and reports concerning each centre should be taken up separately for detailed examination and action.
Reports concerning a centre should be grouped in the following order : 1.
Reports which show excess.
2.
Reports which show neither excess nor shortage.
3.
Reports which show normal shortage.
4.
Reports which show abnormal shortages.
124.
For the purpose of grouping the reports under (iii) and (iv) above, shortages to the following extent may be regarded as normal : Food grain : Percentage of normal shortage.
(a) wheat 82 per month of storage from September to May.
Neither shortage nor excess.
June, July and August.
The limits are for bagged storage.
For bulk storage half the above limits should be taken as normal.
Shortages above these limits should be regarded as abnormal.
These limits, however, are not to be followed as a matter of course and every case should be examined on its merits.
Reasons should be forthcoming in all cases."
It clearly shows that these limits are not followed as a matter of course and every case has to be examined on its own merits.
Limits in PR Manual have been of the year 1949 whereas the latest studies show that there is gain in weight of wheat due to moisture.
Paras 123 and 124 also do not deal with the gian in weight in wheat due to moisture.
So, these paras are irrelevant to bring home any point in controversy.
Court can take a judicial note of the fact that in the year 1949, storage facilities available in this part of the country were not as good as they are today.
This observation is fortified by the studies/reports copies of which have been attached as Annexures R/1 and R/2 with the written statement which clearly go to show that there is a gain in weight in wheat during storage.
18.
If the petitioners can avail of the credit of losses in paddy to the tune of 2% during storage then in all fairness, they can be asked to account for the gain in weight due to moisture in wheat during storage.
The respondents-State has been able to prove with the help of scientific studies conducted by various institutes that now it is an accepted fact that there is a gain in weight in wheat due to moisture during storage.
Practical experience has also indicated gain in weight in wheat during storage.
Based on this practical experience, the respondents-State has fixed the norms fixing the percentage of gain in weight under different conditions of storage.
In fact the petitioners themselves have been accounting for such a gain and making payment for the same and they have been taking credit for the loss in weight in paddy/rice during storage.
For the reasons recorded above, I find no merit in this writ petition and the same is dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.