AL Bahri, J - The petitioner has approached this court for quashing order of the Labour Court dated November 8, 1990 as well as order passed by the respondents dismissing him from service.
Only narration of certain facts would show the grave injustice done to the petitioner in this case.
The petitioner was working as a waiter with Haryana Tourism and posted at Narnaul.
He was served with a charge-sheet in the year 1979 and placed under suspension vide order dated October 4, 1979.
He was transferred to Panchkula.
Since the Manager at Narnaul was not relieving the petitioner, a representation was made by the petitioner Annexure P-3 on October 13, 1979, that a direction be given for relieving him so that he could join at Panchkula.
Such direction was given on November 5, 1979 and the letter was handed over to the petitioner on November 6, 1979.
On that day he was relieved and he joined at Panchkula on November 14, 1979.
Another charge-sheet was served upon the petitioner regarding his absence from November 6, 1979 to November 13, 1979; that after inquiry was held, he was dismissed vide order Annexure P-6, dated January 1, 1982.
It was this order, which was subject matter of the dispute before the Labour Court in industrial dispute raised under Section 10 of the Industrial Disputes Act.
2.
Three dates were fixed before the Labour Court for the petitioner to produce evidence i.e. June 5, 1990, August 23, 1990 and October 30, 1990.
The case was adjourned on account of the Lawyers' strike and finally on November 8, 1990 for lack of evidence, the reference was answered against the workman.
On behalf of the management also no evidence was produced.
3.
No reply was filed to the writ petition by the management.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties.
4.
The fact that petitioner was relieved on November 6, 1979 at Narnaul and he joined at Panchkula on November 14, 1979 is not disputed.
Some joining time was required to be given to the petitioner who was to be relieved at Narnaul and to join at Panchkula, both extreme ends of the State of Haryana.
Obviously on the date he was relieved, he was not to join at Panchkula.
Even if Civil Services Rules as such and not applicable in the case of the petitioner, a reasonable time was to be allowed to him to join at Panchkula, and the principles enunciated in the Civil Services Rules could well be followed and a period of 7 days should have been allowed, the distance is between being about 350 Kms.
5.
There is another angle of the case which has been completely missed by the Labour Court.
Assuming for the sake of arguments, the charge framed against the petitioner has been established that there was undue delay joining the post at Panchkula or that for this period there was absence on the part of the petitioner, the question is to whether in the circumstances of the present case, order of dismissal was justified or not was to be considered by the Labour Court.
We are of the firm view that the circumstances stated above did not warrant order of dismissal.
The petitioner was not relieved promptly when order of transfer was made.
He had to make a representation and secure specific directions in this respect.
Thus, this was not a case where the petitioner himself deliberately wanted to avoid the order of his transfer which was made during the period of his suspension.
Furthermore, during the period of suspension, no work was to be taken from the petitioner.
Only his presence was to be recorded at the place where his headquarters were to be fixed and even he was absent for few days, the said period could be treated as leave of the kind due.
Dismissal of the petitioner was not at all called for in these circumstances, more so when there was no allegation of any misconduct on the part of the petitioner.
6.
Learned counsel for the respondents contended that the matter be again referred to the Labour Court where all such matters could be discussed.
We are afraid that this course should not be adopted to put the parties to more harassment.
Accordingly, we quash the order of the Labour Court as well as the order of dismissal Annexure P/6 dated January 1, 1982 and direct the respondents to take in service the petitioner promptly and give him benefit of continuity of service and the arrears.
We direct the respondents to treat the period of absence, if any, as period of leave of the kind due.
Alongwith arrears, the respondents would pay costs of this petition to the petitioner which are quantified at Rs. 2000/-.
Let these directions be complied with in a period of two months from today.
Petition allowed.