MN Rao, J - The Life Insurance Corporation was established on 191956 under the provisions of the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956 (Act 31/56) (hereinafter referred to as the Act).
The Corporation in exercise of the powers vested in it under clauses (b) and (bb) of sub-section (2) of Section 49 of the Act and with the previous approval of the Central Government made regulations called "Life Insurance Corporation of India (Staff) Regulations, 1960" governing the conditions of service of the employees of the Corporation.
By Regulation 5 the staff of the Corporation are classified into 4 classes :  (1) Class I ..... Officers (2) Class II......(Development) Officers (2) Class III......Supervisory and Clerical (2) Class IV.......Subordinate Staff.
The three petitioners are now working as Class I Officers in the service of the Life Insurance Corporation.
They joined the service of the LIC after 1856.
The following are their service particulars.
Date of Birth Date of entry into Class-III Post Promotion to Class I Post Petitioner No. 1 22.3.32 14.2.58 Petitioner No. 2 1732 11.11.57 Petitioner No. 3 191032 91157 On 1787 petitioners 1 and 3 were promoted as Administrative Officers, a second stage promotion in Class I posts.
Class II posts are occupied by Development Officers and that branch is treated separately for purpose of promotions to Class I Posts.
The Regulations provide for promotion of Class II and Class III Officers to Class I posts.
2.
When the Corporation was establishment the employees of the erstwhile insurers were transferred to the Corporation and the Regulations subsequently made by the Corporation maintain the difference between the employees appointed on or after 1.9.56 by the Corporation and the former category commonly called "the transferred employees".
The Regulations made in 1956 which were superseded later by 1960 Regulations maintained the distinction between the two categories of employees in the matter of the age of superannuation - the age of superannuation of transferred employees was 60 years and discretion was conferred on the authority to extend the age up to 65 years, but in the case of other employees the retirement age was fixed at 55 years with discretion to extend up to 60 years.
Regulation 19 of the 1960 Regulations which deals with the superannuation reads as follows :  SUPERANNUATION AND RETIREMENT :  "10(1) A transferred employee shall retire on completion of age 60; but the appointing authority may direct such employee to retire on completion of 55 years of age or at any time thereafter, if his efficiency is found to have been impaired.
(2) An employee appointed to the service of the corporation on or after 1st September, 1956 shall retire on completion of 58 years of age; but the appointing authority may direct such employee to retire on completion of 55 years of age or at any time thereafter if his efficiency is found to have been impaired ...." The difference in the age of superannuation between the two categories of employees was thus explicitly preserved.
There was an industrial dispute between Class III and Class IV employees who entered the service of the Corporation on or after 1.9.56 and the Corporation on several matters including the age of retirement.
A settlement was arrived at on 29165 between the Management and the Workmen.
Para 1 of Terms of Settlement which deals with the retirement age of new employees (those who joined service on or after 1.9.56).
"There will be no distinction between Class III and Class IV "transferred employees" and Class III and Class IV employees who entered the service of the Corporation on or after 1.9.56 in regard to retirement age which shall be 60."
The Settlement brought about uniformity in the age of Superannuation between transferred employees and new employees in so far as Class III and Class IV employees are concerned.
This Settlement was incorporated in Regulation 19 by way of an amendment with effect from 19665.
The Amended Regulation 19 reads :-  "19(1) An employee belonging to Class III or Class IV and a transferred employee belonging to Class I or Class II shall retire on completion age 60; but the appointing authority may direct such employee to retire on completion of 55 years of age or at any time thereafter, if his efficiency is found to have been impaired.
(2) An employee belonging to Class I or Class II appointed to the service of the Corporation on or after Ist September, 1956 shall retire on completion of 58 years of age, but the appointing authority may direct such employee to retire on completion of 55 years of age or at any time thereafter, if his efficiency is found to have been impaired."
(2A) xx xx xx  On 22.2.83 the Corporation made Life Insurance Corporation Class III and Class IV Employees (Superannuation and Retirement) Rules, 1983 making it obligatory in respect of the Class III and Class IV employees appointed on or after 22.2.83 to retire on completion of the age of 58 years with liberty to the Corporation to retire them on completion of 55 years in public interest by giving three months' notice or salary in lieu thereof.
3.
The question that falls for consideration in this writ petition is : what is the age of superannuation in respect of Class I Officers of the LIC promoted from Class III after 19665.
4.
Shri Rama Chandra Reddy ?
learned counsel for the petitioners contends that the Regulation 19 in terms does not provide that a Class III Officer on promotion to Class I should retire at the age of 58 years.
The orders of promotion issued in favour of the petitioners do not specify that as Class I Officers they should retire at the age of 58.
The settlement dated 29165 being a condition of service relating to the age of superannuation, all the persons occupying Class III posts as on date of settlement 29165 are entitled to continue in service till they attain the age of 60 years even after getting promotion to Class I posts.
5.
Respondent No. 6 is the Federation of Class I Officers Associations and it supported the stand of petitioners.
Shri Suryanarayana Murthy, learned counsel for R-6 contends that Regulation 19(2) applies only to direct recruits to the post of Class-I or Class II recruited as such after 1.9.56 and they alone should retire on completion of the age of 58 years but not Officers promoted to Class I posts from Class III.
The relevant date being 19665, all the Officers holding the Class III posts on that date are entitled to continue in service until they attain the age of 60 even after promotion to Class I posts.
6.
Shri Rama Rao, learned counsel for the impleaded 7th respondent contends that all Class III and Class IV employees governed by clause (2) of 1960 Regulations are brought within the purview of clause (1) of Regulation 19(1) of 1965 Regulations; only direct recruits to Class I or Class II posts on or after 1.9.56 are covered by clause (2) of Regulation 19 of 1965 Regulation.
7.
Opposing these contentions Shri Sivarama Sastry, learned counsel for the LIC maintains that the interpretation sought to be placed on Regulation 19(2) by the petitioners and respondents 6 and 7 is clearly contrary to the language of Clause (2).
It was never the intention of the Regulation making authority to allow two categories in Class I posts with different ages of superannuation - Promotees from Class III retiring at 60 years and direct recruits retiring at 58 years of age.
The only distinction the Regulation making authority recognised was between the transferred employees and new employees and the distinction had to be maintained because of historical reasons and this classification was upheld by the Supreme Court in LIC of India v. SS Srivastava, A.I.R. 1987 SC 1527.
The contentions advanced on behalf of the petitioners and respondents 6 and 7 based on the settlement dated 29165 were considered by the Supreme Court in Srivastava case in which the constitutionality of Regulation 19(1) was upheld.
8.
The principal contention urged in support of the writ petition relates to the interpretation of clause 19(2).
The opening words;  "An employee belonging to Class I or Class II appointed to the service of the Corporation on or after 1st September, 1956 shall retire on completion of 58 years of age."
According to the learned counsel for the petitioners and respondents 6 and 7 exclude in their application promotee Officers in Class I. I am not inclined to accept this contention.
The plain meaning of the first limb of clause (2) is that all the employees who joined the service of the LIC on or after 1.9.56 and holding the Class I or Class II posts must retire on attaining the age of 58 years.
The relevant factor is : what is the post an employee who joined after 1.9.56 is holding when he attained the age of 58 years.
If he is in Class I or Class II post on attaining the age of 58 years he has to retire under the first limb of Regulation 19(2).
The words :  "appointed to the service of the Corporation on or after 1st September, 1956."
Appointments include promotions and this is made explicit by Regulation 6.
Regulation 7(1) lays down that all recruitments and promotions shall be made against the vacancies in sanctioned posts.
By Clause (1) of Regulation 14 all persons when appointed to posts in Class I or Class II shall be on probation for a period of one year.
Appointment thus comprehends both direct recruitment as well as promotion.
This is further made explicit by Regulation 16(1) which obligates that every Officer promoted to a higher post shall be on probation - for one year in the cse of posts belonging to Class I and Class II and six months in other cases.
There is no lacuna or ambiguity in clause (2) of Regulation 19 excluding its operation to Class I Officers promoted to that post from Class III.
The specific language of Regulation 19(2) reflects the intention of the Regulation making authority not to lay down different ages of superannuation in respect of Class I Officers - for direct recruits 58 years and for promotees Officers 60 years.
The clause clearly lays down the age of superannuation as 58 years in respect of both the categories of Officers.
Had the LIC prescribed two different ages of superannuation - 58 years for direct recruits and 60 years for promotees it would have been clearly discriminatory attracting the inhibition of Article 14.
Accepting the contentions advanced by the petitioners in regard to the interpretation of clauses (1) and (2) would amount to rewriting the two clauses as follows :  "Regulation 19(1) :- An employee belonging to Class III or Class IV on the date of coming into force of this Rule and a transferred employee belonging to Class I or Class II shall retire on completion of age 60; but the appointing authority may direct such employee to retire on completion of 55 years of age or at any time thereafter, if his efficiency is found to have been impaired.
(2) An employee belonging to Class I or Class II appointed by direct recruitment to the service of the Corporation on or after 1st September, 1956 shall retire on completion of 58 years of age, but the appointing authority may direct such employee to retire on completion of 55 years of age or at any time thereafter if his efficiency is found to have been impaired."
It is a settled canon of interpretation that no Court in the interpretative process can rewrite a statutory provision; the provision has to be interpreted with reference to the language employed "if the meaning is fairly gathered."
(Vide Shama Rao v. Dt. Magistrate, AIR 1952 SC 324).
9.
The Settlement between the Union and the Management signed on 29165 in unmistakable terms had obliterated the distinction between transferred employees and the other employees in so far as Class III and Class IV are concerned in regard to the age of retirement.
Shri Suryanarayana's contention that in view of this settlement which was incorporated in clause (1) of Regulation 19, all the officers who entered the service on or after 1.9.56 and holding Class III and Class IV posts by the date of the amendment i.e., 1961965 have a right to continue until they attained the age of 60 years irrespective of the fact whether they remained as Class III Officers or got promotion to Class I, is untenable.
Clause (1) does not make any distinction between transferred employees and new employees holding the posts of Class III or Class IV; this statutory protection is not available to new employees who joined service on or after 1.9.56 and got promotion to Class I posts.
In Srivastava case, the Supreme Court after referring to the settlement which was the basis for the amendment of Regulation 19 with effect from 19665 held :  "Having regard to the lower emoluments and other benefits which the employees belonging to Class III or Class IV are entitled to get from the Corporation and the higher emoluments and other benefits to which officers belonging to Class I and Class II are entitled and also the nature of their work and the powers enjoyed by them we are of the view that fixation of different ages of retirement for the different Classes of employees would not by itself be violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution ..... Having accepted the promotion along with the higher benefits flowing from it he (Srivastava) cannot contend after several years that he had been prejudicially affected by the condition relating to the age of retirement applicable to Class I Officers appointed after September 1, 1956.
That apart the higher emoluments and other perquisites to which Class I employees may be entitled to and the better conditions of work which are enjoyed by them substantially compensate the effect of the lowering of the age of retirement from 60 years to 58 years."
In Srivastava case, the respondent Srivastava joined the service after 1.9.56 and he got promotion to Class I on 8.10.63, long before the settlement.
If the settlement dated 29165 had really constituted the legal foundation for Class III Officers promoted to Class I post to retire from Class I post on attaining the age of 60 years, Srivastava would have definitely succeeded before the Supreme Court, but the claims were negatived by the Supreme Court : the statement of law extracted supra is one of the grounds on which he failed.
Shri Suryanarayana says that had the Officers promoted from Class III to Class I posts been told at the time of their promotion that the age of retirement in the promoted posts was 58 years they would not have opted for promotion.
This submission does not merit acceptance.
Nothing prevented the Officers from declining promotion to Class I posts.
If they wanted to avail of the advantage of continuing in service until they attain the age of 60 years; on the other hand they consciously opted for promotions obviously because of the :  "Higher emoluments and other benefits and the nature of the work and powers enjoyed by Class I Officers."
As observed by the Supreme Court in Srivastava case.
A review petition was filed in the Srivastava case in which this point was specifically urged stating :  "The higher age of retirement would have been assured if no promotion had been given."
But the review petition was dismissed by the Supreme Court on 18887 and thus the last word was been pronounced by the highest Court on this point.
10.
It is the contention of Shri Rama Rao that by clause (2) of Regulation 19 (of 1960 Regulations) the age of retirement of all the Officers who joined the service on or after 1.9.56 was fixed at 58 years and all these Officers were brought within the purview of the amended Regulation 19(1) in 1965 leaving only a small section - direct recruits to Class I or Class II whose age of retirement by clause (2) was fixed at 58 years.
This contention is clearly unsustainable in my view as already discussed supra.
The language of Clauses 19(1) and (2) militates against the construction.
The amended Regulation 19(2) comprehends not only persons employed by direct recruitment to Class I or Class II posts, but also promotees to the said posts and the age of retirement of all of them who joined the service on or after 1.9.56 is 58 years.
11.
The last contention urged by Shri Rama Rao is that Class III officers are entitled to officiate in Class I posts and in such cases even if they complete 58 years they continue to be in service since they are only Class III Officers.
No specific instance has been brought to my notice in this regard.
It is difficult to conceive of a Class III officer after completing 58 years being asked to officiate in Class I post.
As per Regulation 19(2) no one appointed to the service on or after 1.9.56 holding Class I or Class II post shall continue after attaining the age of 58 years.
In view of this clear embargo the question of a Class III officer being asked to officiate in a Class I post after completing 58 years of age would not arise.
12.
For the these reasons I hold that Officers who joined the service of the LIC on or after 1.9.56 and promoted to Class I and Class II posts shall retire on attaining the age of 58 years under Regulation 19(2).
The order of retirement issued on 111188 by the second respondent applying Regulation 19(2) to retire the petitioners on attaining the age of 58 years does not suffer from any legal infirmity.
The writ petition, therefore, fails and accordingly it is dismissed, but in the circumstances without costs.
Petition dismissed.