Harjit Singh Bedi, J - The present writ petition is directed against the, communication Annexure P-11 dated 18th June, 1990, whereby the State of Haryana has declined to refer the dispute between the petitioner and the management for adjudication to the Labour Court.
The facts of the case are that the petitioner was appointed as an Operator with respondent No. 2 vide letter of appointment dated 9th September, 1985, Annexure P-1.
On completion of probation, he was confirmed in the employment and continued to work satisfactorily.
In July, 1989, the petitioner proceeded on leave and could not return to his duties within the stipulated time on account of prolonged illness.
According to the petitioner he addressed various communications to respondent No. 2 praying for more leave and finally, communication datd 23rd September, 1989, Annexure P-8 to the petition, was sent by registered post.
It appears that during the period of illness of the petitioner, there was a lock out in the premises of respondent No. 2.
When the petitioner recovered from his illness on September 13, 1989, he learnt that some settlement had been arrived at between the Union and the management and as such, he sought to join his duties with his employer.
It was, thereafter, he learnt that his name had been struck off the rolls with effect from 26th August, 1989 in view of clause 20.1.4 of the standing orders of the respondent No. 2, which provided that if a workman remained absent continuously for more than 10 working days without obtaining sanctioned leave, he would be deemed to have voluntarily abandoned his employment leading to the loss of lien on the appointment.
The petitioner, thereafter, served a demand note dated 7th October, 1989, claiming reinstatement and other benefits and after making due efforts, the Conciliation Officer, Gurgaon, furnished his failure report to the appropriate government.
The Government, however, vide order Annexure P-11, declined to refer the dispute for adjudication as already mentioned above.
2.
The only argument raised by learned counsel for the petitioner is that it was not open to the government to go deep into the matter and arrive at a conclusion that no case was made out for reference of the dispute to the Labour Court.
My attention has been brought to Annexure P-10 to the petition, whereby the workman and the management took conflicting stands which in the opinion of learned counsel for the petitioner showed that there was a dispute which required adjudication.
3.
In reply, the counsel for the respondent-State has relied on the written statement in order to contend that it was an act of abandonment of the employment by the Workman and as such, there was no occasion to refer the dispute between the parties to the Labour Court.
4.
After giving my thoughtful consideration to the submission of the parties, I am of the view that this petition deserves to succeed.
From Annexure P-10 it is dear that the petitioner as well as the management had taken diametrically opposite stands with regard to the circumstances in which the services of the petitioner had been terminated.
It was only the Labour Court which could, after going into the matter and examining the evidence adduced by the parties, record a finding as to which of two versions was the correct one.
It has been observed by the Supreme Court in MP Irrigation Karamchari Sangh v. State of MP, 1985(2) S.C.C.
103 that in exceptional cases that the State Government may on a proper examination of the demand, come to the conclusion that the demands are either perverse or frivolous and do not warrant a reference but as a rule, adjudication of demands made by the workman should be left to the Labour Court to decide.
It has also been observed in the 'aforesaid judgment that the government should be very slow to attempt an examination of the demands with a view to decline the reference and the courts would be vigilant whenever an attempt is made by the Government to usurp the powers which should be properly left to the Labour Court.
5.
It will also be seen that Annexure P-11 which is the order impugned before me, that the reference has been declined as it had been found on enquiry by the Government that the workman-petitioner had abandoned his employment.
Although the finding to the above effect has been recorded, yet the reasons for arriving at that conclusion have not been stated.
The order is, therefore, had on this score, as well.
6.
For the reasons recorded above, this petition is allowed and Annexure P-11 is quashed.
The Government is directed to refer the dispute between the petitioner and the management-respondent No. 2 for adjudication to the competent Labour Court within a period of two months from today.
Costs of the petition are quantified at Rs. 500/-.
Petition allowed.