MR Agnihotri, J - This judgment shall dispose of CWP Nos. 4610, 1490, 1035, 1938, 1939, 1940, 1941, 3641 and 3642 of 1988 in which the some award dated 11 September, 1987, given by the Labour Court, Patiala, has been challenged, whereby the order of termination of services of the workmen - petitioners in these writ petitions, has been upheld.
2.
Briefly stated, the petitioners in the aforesaid writ petitions were the employees of M/s Ranbaxy Laboratories Ltd. Mohali, before their services were terminated on 21st January, 1983.
The petitioners served a demand notice containing various demands of the workmen which gave rise to an industrial dispute and the same was referred for adjustication under Section 10(1)C of the Industrial Disputes Act, common in all these petitions reads as under :-  "Whether termination of services of Shri...... (name) workman is justified and in order ?
If not, to what relief/exact amount of compensation is he entitled ?"
3.
The learned Labour Court, after recording evidence, came to the conclusion that the ex-parte inquiry held by the Inquiry Officer before termination of services of the petitioners was not fair and proper.
Consequently, it decided issue No. 1, that is, "whether there has been a fair and proper enquiry," against the management.
However, so far as the second issue is concerned, that is, "whether the order of termination of services of the workman is justified and in order," the learned Labour Court held that as the petitioners had resorted to strike against the management during the currency of the earlier settlement, termination of services of the petitioners by the management on that account was legally permissible as the absence of the petitioners amounted to misconduct on their part.
Resultantly, the second issue having been decided against the workmen, the learned Labour Court held that the order of termination of their services was justified and in order and, therefore, the workmen were not entitled to any relief.
Aggrieved against this award, the petitioners have invoked the writ jurisdiction of this court to have the award in question quashed, mainly on the ground that mere participation in an illegal and unjustified strike is not sufficient to impose the punishment of dismissal or termination of services of the workmen, and the management must establish either during the domestic inquiry or before the Industrial Tribunal that the workmen involved indulged in vandalism or violence, instigation or sabotage.
4.
In reply to the writ petition, written statement has been filed by respondent No. 1, in which the position taken by the management before the learned Labour Court has been reiterated.
It has further been pleaded that services of the petitioners had been terminated for gross misconduct which had been proved against them during the inquiry which was fair and proper and did not violate the principles of natural justice.
To that extent, according to the respondents, the finding of the learned Labour Court was illegal.
5.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and having gone through their pleadings and the material placed on the record, the following salient facts have emerged which are relevant for coming to the conclusion as to whether the services of the petitioner could legally be terminated :-  (1) The petitioners were the office-bearers of the employees union; (2) The petitioners served a demand notice on 10th November, 1982, on the respondent-employer; (3) When the demands were not accepted, the workmen agitated and ultimately went on strike with effect from 15th December, 1982.
(4) The strike continued till 20th April, 1983, and when it was called off, the petitioner-workmen reported for duty on 20th April, 1983, but they were refused entry, while a number of other workmen were allowed to resume duty; (5) A settlement had been arrived at between the Union and the workmen during the course of conciliation proceedings on 10th September, 1981, which was valid upto 30th June, 1984;  (6) The representatives of the union were advised by the officers of the management that the workmen were not entitled to raise the demands and resort to strike during the currency of the settlement; (7) The management started disciplinary proceedings against the workmen who were instigating continuance of the strike; they were charge-sheeted on 21st December, 1982; the charge-sheet had not been personally served and had to the published in the newspaper; (8) The workmen did not participate in the inquiry proceedings and the same was held ex-parte; (9) The inquiry officer did not take any steps to enforce the presence of workmen nor did he give them any opportunity to take part in the inquiry proceedings; (10) Therefore, the Labour Court had to hold that the inquiry held against the petitioners was violative of the principles of natural justice and that the ex-parte inquiry was neither fair nor proper; and (11) During the strike, though certain workmen had instigated their colleagues, yet no vandalism, violence or sabotage had been proved and it was almost a case of mere participation in the strike during currency of the settlement.
6.
Taking into consideration the aforesaid facts proved on the record, I am of the considered view that it is a clear case of mere participation in the illegal strike and in the absence of sufficient proof regarding vandalism, violence or sabotage, the termination of services of the workmen was not justified.
Even if there was an earlier settlement, which was valid and in force at the time of strike, during the currency of which the strike resorted to by the workmen was illegal, the management was still not competent in law to terminate their services on that basis.
7.
Faced with this situation, Mr. PK Mutneja, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the management, has vehemently argued that firstly, the disciplinary inquiry held against the petitioners was fair and proper and full opportunity was afforded to the petitioners.
If they did not associate in the inquiry the management had no option but to proceed ex-parte against them.
Secondly, according to the learned counsel, the petitioners had been found to instigate other workmen, which was enough to hold them guilty for misconduct without any further proof of vandalism, violence or sabotage.
8.
With respect to the learned counsel, I do not agree with him, as I am bound by the law laid down by the Division Bench of this Court in The Coca-cola Factory Workers Union v. The Management of Punjab Beverages Pvt Ltd., Chandigarh and another, 1987 Lab.
IC 607, in which it was held as under :-  "............the judicial consensus at the highest level when it comes to the meting out of punishment to workers participating in an illegal and unjustified strike is, that mere participation in such a strike per se is not sufficient to impose punishment of termination of service on a workman, the management must establish, either during the domestic enquiry or failing that before the Tribunal, that the worker in question indulged in vandalism or violence, instigation or sabotage."
Consequently, I allow these petitions and by issuing a writ of certiorari, quash the impugned award dated 11th September, 1987, Annexure P-1, and hold that termination of services of the petitioners was neither justified nor in accordance with law.
Resultantly, the petitioners shall stand reinstated and shall also be entitled to the back wages and other benefits to which they would have been entitled in law had their services not been terminated by the impugned award.
However, there shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.