Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - This is a petition challenging the orders imposing sentence of five years and dismissal from service passed against the petitioner.
A grievance regarding the rejection of the petition filed by the petitioner on the ground that it was not submitted personally but through a counsel has also been made.
2.
The petitioner who was working as a Constable in the Border Security Force was served with a charge-sheet alleging that he had committed a civil offence namely, attempt to murder.
It was alleged that on 2361987 at BOP Rajoke the petitioner fired shots as a result of which Head Constable Makhan Singh was injured in the chest with intent to kill him.
A copy of the charge-sheet is at Annexure P-6.
After consideration of the matter, the Court of Inquiry recorded a finding of 'guilt'.
A copy of this finding is at Annexure P-1.
This finding was confirmed by an order of 13.1.1989.
The petitioner filed a petition on 1611989 which was rejected by the Director General, Border Security Force vide his order dated 1631989.
The petitioner, through his counsel, submitted a petition under section 117(2) of the Border Security Force Act, 1968.
This petition was rejected vide orders passed on 11.7.1989 with the observation that "petitions submitted by the convicts only are entertained."
3.
The petitioner has filed the present petition challenging the finding and conviction recorded against him and the order rejecting his petition on the ground that it was submitted through the counsel and not directly by the petitioner.
4.
Respondents have filed a written statement.
The contentions raised in the petition have been broadly controverted.
I have heard Mr. Merchea, learned counsel for the petitioner.
He has raised three contentions.
Firstly, it has been argued by the learned counsel that under Rule 54(5) of the Border Security Force Rules, 1969, it was incumbent upon the respondents to state the "time and place of the alleged offence."
These particulars were lacking in the charge-sheet and therefore, the entire proceedings were vitiated.
Secondly, it has been contended that no reasons have been recorded while holding the petitioner guilty.
It has been further argued that even the order rejecting the petitioner's representation assigned no reasons.
Learned counsel contends that both the orders are vitiated on the ground that they are absolutely laconic and have been passed without any application of mind.
The last contention raised by the learned counsel is that the petitioner had filed a petition under section 117(2) which has been wrongly rejected on the ground that it has not been submitted personally by the petitioner.
5.
As for the first contention, it is appropriate to notice the provision contained in rule 54(5).
It reads as under :-  "54.
CHARGES.
- (1) There shall be a separate charge for each offence.
(2)(a) If a single act or series of acts is of such a nature that it is doubtful which of several offences the facts which can be proved will constitute the accused may be charged with having committed all or any of such offences, and any number of such charges may be tried at once or he may be charged in the alternative with having committed some or one of the said offences.
(b) The charge for the more serious offence shall precede the one for the less serious offence.
(3) Each charge shall consist of two parts, namely : (a) statement of the offence, and (b) particulars of the offence.
(4) The offence shall be stated if not a civil offence as nearly as practicable, in the words of the Act and if a civil offence, in such words as would sufficiently describe the offence.
(5)(a) The particulars shall state the time and place of the alleged offence and the person (if any) against whom, or the thing (if any) in respect of which, it was committed and these should be sufficient to give the accused notice of the matter with which he is charged.
(b) In case such particulars are not sufficient to give the accused notice of the matter with which he is charged the charge shall also contain such particulars of the manner in which the offence was committed as will be sufficient for that purpose."
The charge-sheet against the petitioner was issued vide orders dated 27101988.
It reads as under :-  Charge-Sheet  "The accused No. 842543741 Constable Raj Kumar of 84 Battalion B.S.F.
attached with 35 Battalion B.S.F.
is charged with :- BSF ACT SECTION 46 : COMMITTING A CIVIL OFFENCE, THAT IS TO SAY ATTEMPT TO MURDER, PUNISHABLE UNDER SECTION 307 INDIAN PENAL CODE.
In that he,at BOP Rajoke, on 23 June, 1987, fired shots from 762mm SL Rifle Body No. CS-8560, Butt No. 207 at No. 685886065 Head Constable Makhan Singh with intent to kill him, and thereby wounded the said Head Constable Makhan Singh in the right chest.
Place :- Khemkaran  Dated :- 27th Oct, 1988  Sd/-  /  (PK Bahri)  COMMANDANT 35 BN BSF On a perusal of clauses (3) and (5) of rule 54, I find that an accused person is required to be informed of the alleged offence with reasonable amount of precision and not mathematical exactitude.
The information has to be supplied to the accused only with the object of reasonably apprising him of the allegations against him.
In the present case, a perusal of the charge-sheet given to the petitioner shows that the particulars of the offence alongwith place and date were clearly conveyed to him.
The omission to mention the exact time, in my view, does not amount to violation of a mandatory provision which may entitle him to contend that the proceedings are vitiated.
In this connection, I am of the view that clause (5) of rule 54 contains a directory provision which has been sufficiently complied with in the present case.
6.
The counsel was vehement in his contention that the finding recorded vide Annexure P-1 and the order rejecting the petitioner's representation at Annexure P-3 were vitiated as no reasons had been assigned.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents it has been mentioned that the action of the authorities was in consonance with the principles enunciated by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in the case reported as Som Datt Datta v. Union of India, AIR 1969 SC 414.
Their Lordships were pleaded to observed as under :-  "There is no express obligation imposed by Section 164 or by Section 165 of the Army Act on the confirming authority or upon the Central Government to give reasons in support of its decision to confirm the proceedings of the Court Martial.
Apart from any requirement imposed by the Statute or statutory rule either expressly or by necessary implication, it cannot be said that there is any general principle or any rule of natural justice that a statutory tribunal should always and in every case give reasons in support of its decision.
Such orders cannot, therefore, be held to be illegal for not giving any reasons for confirming the orders of the Court Martial."
In view of the above pronouncement the learned counsel did not press his submission any further.
Though normally a quasi-judicial authority is expected to disclose the process of reasoning, I do not consider it necessary to go into the matter in greater detail in view of the fact that the learned counsel did not press his submission in view of the judgment in Som Datt Datta's case (supra).
7.
The third submission of the learned counsel is one, which, I think, should succeed.
Section 117 provides as under :-  "117.
Remedy against order, findings or sentence of Security Force Court.
(1) Any person subject to this Act who considers himself aggrieved by any order passed by any Security Force Court may present a petition to the officer or authority empowered to confirm any finding or sentence of such Security Force Court, and the confirming authority may take such steps as may be considered necessary to satisfy itself as to the correctness, legality or propriety of the order passed or as to regularity of any proceeding to which the order relates.
(2) Any person subject to this Act who considers himself aggrieved by a finding or sentence of any Security Force Court which has been confirmed, may present a petition to the Central Government, the Director-General, or any prescribed Officer superior in command to the one who confirmed such finding or sentence and the Central Government, the Director-General, or the prescribed officer, as the case may be, may pass such order thereon as it or he thinks fit."
An aggrieved person has a right to file a petition.
The petitioner in the present case had submitted the petition through his counsel.
Copy of the petition is at Annexure P-4.
The petition has not been entertained on the short ground that it was not submitted by the convict.
In the written statement, reference has been made to rule 169.
It has been mentioned that a combined reading of section 177 and rule 169 shows that the petition has to be filed by the convict only.
I am not inclined to accept the view taken by the authorities.
A counsel acts for and on behalf of the person aggrieved.
A petition submitted through a counsel is still a petition by the person who is aggrieved against an order.
In our country there may be large number of persons who are totally illiterate and may not be conversant with the modalities and methodology of submission of petitions.
They may engage qualified persons for the purpose.
If their representation or petition is rejected only on the ground that it has not been submitted personally, a great hardship can ensue and the very purpose of the provision shall be defeated.
Surely, such could not be intention of the legislature or the rule making authority.
In the circumstances of the case, I feel that the petition submitted on behalf of the petitioner deserves to be considered and decided on merits.
8.
I, therefore, direct that the competent authority shall consider and decide the petition at Annexure P-4 within three months from the date of the receipt of the order.
It shall pass a speaking order.
9.
The petition is allowed to the extent indicated above.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Orders accordingly.