Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - In 1988, there were devastating floods in Punjab.
In terms of money, loss to the property was estimated by the then Financial Commissioner, Revenue-cum-Financial Commissioner and Secretary to Government of Punjab, Irrigation and Power departments to the tune of Rs. 172500 Crores.
This figure was arrived at through Deputy Commissioner and Revenue Officers of the State.
At that time, Shri H.S.
Bedi, was the Chief Engineer.
It was then estimated that the repair of the embankments and flood protection works will cost Rs. 13000 Crores.
In order to prepare the plan, a meeting was held on 1611989, under the Chairmanship of the then Chief Secretary to Government of Punjab.
The minutes of the meeting are incorporated in the Agenda, Annexure P-2 to the writ petition.
In the meeting, it was highlighted that in order to implement the plan, additional funds of Rs. 68.97 Crores would be required.
The second meeting was held under the Chairmanship of Chief Secretary on 1431989.
The petitioner being head of the Irrigation (Drainage) was to implement the plan which was successfully executed.
2.
In the Annual Confidential Report for the period 141989 to 31.3.1990, Financial Commissioner, Irrigation and Power, Punjab, recorded the following remarks :-  "A soft-spoken, diligent and well qualified engineer with construction as his forte.
He established close rapport with the Deputy Commissioners of flood-prone districts and exhibited considerable initiative and drive in organising and carrying out timely repair of damaged flood protection works and executed some new critical works before the monsoon of 1989.
As a result of these efforts, rivers Ravi, Beas and Sutlej were able to carry flash floods of the order of 4 lac cusecs, 55,000 cusecs and 80,000 cusecs respectively without causing any damage.
His integrity was found beyond doubt.
His relations with his colleagues and the public were cordial.
In overall assessment I will rate him 'Very Good'."
But to petitioner's great dismay he received order of compulsory retirement dated 1851990, Annexure P-16 to the writ petition.
The order is purported to have been passed in terms of provisions of Rule 3(1) of Punjab Civil Services (Premature Retirement) Rules, 1975, (hereinafter referred to as 'the Rules').
This petition is directed to challenge the abovesaid order.
3.
The petitioner in this petition has stated that he after graduation in Civil Engineering in 1961, was selected as an Engineer in 1962 by Punjab Public Service Commission.
In the year 1974, he was promoted as Executive Engineer.
In 1981 the petitioner was further promoted as Superintending Engineer.
Thereafter on May 21, 1987, he was promoted as Chief Engineer.
It has been also highlighted in the petition that the petitioner was granted admission for the Course leading Master's Degree of Engineering, of the Cornell University (Ithaca) (USA) and was granted the said degree in the year 1969.
Considering the qualification of the petitioner, he was selected for deputation to the Ministry of Hydraulics, Algeria.
The petitioner was employed as an Expert in Civil Engineering which post he held from November, 1977 to November, 1982.
Even there, his work and conduct were found to be absolutely upto the mark and he came back to India in the year 1982.
It has been highlighted that the petitioner has been rendering meritorious service and his service record has been Good and Very Good.
No adverse entry was ever communicated to him.
It was further stated that the order of compulsory retirement has been passed on extraneous considerations.
4.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner has argued that the case of compulsory retirement of the petitioner was reviewed on December 28, 1988 by the Government and after consideration of the case, it came to the conclusion that the petitioner should be retained in service beyond the age of 50 years.
This order is Annexure P.1/A to the writ petition.
The learned counsel strongly contended that according to the Government instructions for the purpose of compulsory retirement, record of service should be reviewed.
If 75 per cent of the reports are good, he should be allowed to be retained in service.
All the reports of the petitioner are good or very good.
Therefore, according to the test laid down in the instructions, the petitioner could not be retired from service, and his said retirement was wholly unwarranted.
It is further submitted that it has been laid down by the Supreme Court in Union of India v. JN Sinha, A.I.R. 1971 S.C. 40, that the power of compulsory retirement can be exercised in public interest.
This power is to chop out the dead wood.
If the order of compulsory retirement is arbitrary and capricious, the Court can always intervene and set aside the said order.
It is submitted that the order of compulsory retirement in the present case when the record of service of the petitioner is good or very good, cannot be considered to be in public interest and consequently the order has been passed on extraneous reasons and the order is highly arbitrary, unreasonable, and capricious and, therefore, the same is liable to be struck down.
5.
To strengthen his argument, the counsel has referred to Annexure P-1, the record of service of the petitioner which is quoted below:  1980-81 On deputation with Ministry of Hydraulics Algeria.
1981-82 1981-82 1982-83 Good  1983-84 Good  1994-85 Good  1985-86 Good  1986-87 Very Good  1987-88 Good  1988-89 Good  6.
The State has filed written statement and justified the order of compulsory retirement of the petitioner.
It is contended by the learned counsel for the State that the order of compulsory retirement was based on the report of Department in regard to excess expenditure in implementation of the flood control budget and responsibility for the same was fixed on the petitioner and the order of compulsory retirement of the petitioner was passed as his integrity was found doubtful.
7.
The State was directed by this Court vide order dated 1111991 to produce at the time of arguments the service record of the petitioner including all the annual confidential reports  8.
I have perused the summoned record and considered the submissions of the learned counsel for the parties.
9.
In the annual confidential report for the year 1989-90, petitioner's integrity was never doubted.
Rather, his assessment was graded as 'very good' and the Financial Commissioner, Irrigation, Punjab, had appreciated the services rendered by the petitioner in executing the work before Monsoon of 1989.
As such, respondent No. 2 had no occasion to cast aspersions on the petitioner's integrity in executing the work assigned to him.
10.
In Brij Mohan Singh Chopra v. State of Punjab, A.I.R. 1987 Supreme Court 948, the Supreme Court had considered the instructions issued by the Punjab Government which regulate the process of cases of compulsory retirement.
While considering the scope and binding character of the instructions the Supreme Court observed as follows :-  "Since the rule does not contain any further guidelines, the State Government issued a Government Order on September 26, 1975, laying down the guidelines and the procedure necessary to be followed in exercising powers under Rule 3 for premature retirement of a Government employee.
The order stated that the appropriate authority should utilise the power under Rule 3 in a judicious manner to retire a Government employee on formulating its opinion by security of the confidential reports of the employee, and by taking into consideration other substantial material, it may have before it.
The order further stated that it was not feasible to lay down any absolute terms as to how many adverse entries about inefficiency or lack of integrity would justify the premature retirement but it laid stress that the service record as a whole would determine the merit of each case ..........
The order emphasised that the appropriate authority may consider premature retirement of a Government employee if it has reasonable cause to believe that the employee concerned was lacking in integrity irrespective of the assessment of ability and efficiency in work.
It further provided that the appropriate authority should review the cases of employees on their completing 25 years of qualifying service or their attaining 50 years of age.
The Government issued another order on August 4, 1978 pointing out that while exercising power under Rule 3 the service of an employee as a whole would determine the merit of each case but if there was a single entry describing the employee concerned as a person of doubtful integrity that would justify the premature retirement under the Rules.
The executive instructions issued as contained in these two Government orders provide sufficient guidance for the exercise of power under Rule 3.
According to these instructions the service record of an employee has necessarily to be considered while taking decision for the premature retirement of an employee and if there was a single entry casting doubt on the integrity of an employee, the premature retirement of such an employee would be in public interest.
In the absence of any details by which the question of public interest could be determined in the Rules it was open to the State Government to issue executive instructions for the guidance of the appropriate authority to exercise the power of premature retirement and the instructions so issued as contained in the aforesaid Government Orders have binding character .........."  11.
A significant aspect of the matter is the noting on the file leading to the passing of the impugned order.
Shri Boparai, the Secretary, Irrigation in his noting dated 951990, observed as under :-  "I was with Secretary Vigilance the other day.
Point blank he said to me that from the information he has obtained from the Vigilance Department the two officers having the worst reputation for honesty are Chief Engineer Mr. Ram Chand and Superintending Engineer Mr. Sardara Singh.
I would, therefore, recommend that they may be placed under suspension forthwith and proceeded against further.
Shri DR Sudhakar, SE Drainage, Amritsar Circle has also made a major default but considering the magnitude of expenditure by S Sardara Singh compared to Sh. Sudhakar, Shri Sadhakar may be charge-sheeted for a major penalty.
S.Es of the other two Circles - Ferozepur and Patiala - Sarvshri B.L.
Nagpal and lqbal Singh, whose excess expenditure has been to the tune of 75% and 1575% respectively of the budget allocation, may be warned to be careful in future.
Advisor (S) may kindly see for orders.
Secretary, Irrigation and Power  951990."
Adviser (S)  Adviser (S) in his note dated 11.5.1990 proposed as under :-  "Suspension and enquiry does not serve the purpose.
Review for premature retirement would be more appropriate for such large scale financial indiscipline for officers above 50 years.
For below 50 departmental enquiry will do."
The Secretary-respondent in his noting dated 15.5.1990 observed that both are above 50 years of age and qualify for consideration (Para 1 of consolidated instructions).
Objective of the Government policy is that inefficient and the corrupt officials should be weeded out from the services In the instant case both have proved to be startling examples of inefficiency, According to Secretary, Deptt.
of Vigilance (Sh. Sada Nand) both are having a very poor reputation for honesty.
I have seen their A.C.Rs.
which do not have the latest report, but A.C.R.
dossier does not at all point to the possibility of consideration on grounds of integrity.
The Secretary reached the conclusion that there are uncontroversial evidence of inefficiency before him in the present case.
The Secretary recommended that should a decision to prematurely retire these two officers be considered more suitable, it will have to be implemented neatly otherwise the affected employees might go to the Court and get stay.
In order to make it practicable to retire the petitioner with immediate effect and pay three months salary in lieu of notice and the case be put up before the Adviser to the Governor.
The Adviser (S) recommended to the Governor that the petitioner be retired prematurely as he had exceeded the budgetary control.
The Governor on 17.5.1990 approved the compulsory retirement of the petitioner and consequently the impugned order was passed.
12.
It is very interesting to point out here that the Secretary Irrigation had recommended to the Government that the delinquent officer petitioner and some other officers be suspended and departmental action be taken but on the other hand the Adviser (S) recommended the compulsory retirement of the petitioner without bothering to scrutinise the file pertaining to the expenditure on flood control.
13.
A committee was constituted of the Officers Group to consider the flood protection works damaged during September, 1988, flood for the proposed restoration and repair in the priority list Nos. 1 and 2 to be undertaken during the period from 141989 to 3061989.
The meeting of the Committee dated 19489 Annexure P-4 was presided over by the Chief Secretary.
The Committee reviewed the funds available for restoration of damaged flood works.
On the basis of the recommendations of the Officers Group who visited damaged work throughout the State, an amount of Rs. 2800 Crores under first and second priority was required.
14.
Thereafter, Financial Commissioner and Secretary to the Revenue Department conveyed the sanction of the Government to the petitioner who was then Chief Engineer (Drainage).
It was observed as under :-  "Restoration and new strengthening works along main rivers to protect freshly plugged breach sites were planned to be undertaken during 141989 to 3061989.
In the meeting held on 1931989 under the Chairmanship of Chief Secretary, Punjab, it had been decided to utilise funds provided under Plan Budget for "Capital Outlay on Flood Control Projects" during the year 1989-90 for completion of spill-over on-going works and new works for strengthening of plugged breach sites by 3061989 well before the monsoon rains of 1989.
For this purpose, Government have approved works of emergent nature at an approximate cost of Rs. 2461 crores against which anticipatory sanction of Rs. 1716 crores has been accorded pending approval of Project Estimates/Detailed Estimates or by the competent authority.
Estimates in respect of those works may therefore be got approved by the competent authority immediately.
These estimates should be need-based economical keeping in view financial constraints as well as the propose in view."
A meeting was again held under the Chairmanship of Shri RP Ojha, Chief Secretary, on 571989.
According to the minutes of the meeting Annexure P.9, it was observed as under :-  "In the said meeting the Department had been asked to go ahead with the spill-over on-going works, restoration works and new protection works of emergent nature connected with the strengthening of freshly plugged breach sites from the plan provision under head 4711 for the year 1989-90.
Further requirement of additional funds was to be reviewed after 3 months.
Hence the need to hold the present meeting.
He drew attention of the members of page-5 of the agenda Note where upto date progress of works and expenditure has been given."
15.
On 28.2.1990 a meeting was held under the Chairmanship of Mr. HM Singh, Adviser to Governor of Punjab.
In this meeting, Secretary Irrigation and Power, Secretary Department of Finance, Chief Engineer Drainage and Deputy Secretary Irrigation and Power were present and the following decision was taken :-  "Initiating the discussion, the Financial Commissioner Irrigation and Power, Punjab explained that as set out in the agenda note the total liability to be discharged by the Drainage Administration worked out at Rs. 770 crores upto 30.8.1989.
It was further explained that as some works which were in hand on 3061989 were completed during the first fortnight of July, 1989 before the onset of monsoon, the total liability further went up from Rs. 770 crores to Rs. 1000 crores.
Against this, the Department of Finance, however, had released only an amount of Rs. 193 crores of additional grant to meet emergent maintenance needs on the non-plan side.
It was also explained that the flood experienced during the 1989 with peak of 4 lacs cusecs in Ravi, 70,000 cusecs in river Sutlej and 60,000 cusecs in river Beas passed off safely and the works withstood fury of the floods well.
Stating further the FCIP added that the liabilities incurred on emergent flood works at the instance of the Deputy Commissioners and other senior State functionaries for the safety of the people who had undergone traumatic experience in 1988 were in larger public interest.
Furthermore, the works executed were checked by the Organisation of CE/Vigilance and Quality Control and some of these works were also inspected by the District Flood Protection Committee through the D.C.s of the respective districts and found in order.
2.
The Finance Secretary in reply informed that as the budget proposals had been firmed up, it was impossible to provide additional funds at this point of time.
It was, however, assured that the Department of Finance, would provide funds in April, 1990, for clearing the liability actually incurred on the execution of the flood protection works.
It was suggested that meantime the A.D. should work out the contractor/agency-wise figures showing the total cost of works executed by each of them, payment, already released and payments due to be released.
The Finance Secretary desired that this exercise should cover the liability in two parts i.e. the first upto 3061989 and the second beyond that date.
In the course of discussion, the Adviser (S) intervened to say that as the works had admittedly been executed under local pressure and all such works stood checked up to satisfaction, there was no point in withholding the payments of the contractors."
It is evident from the above communication that the flood control measures were of very urgent nature and the Government approved the same and assured the allotment of funds vide minutes, Annexure P4.
All the flood control projects were approved by the Government.
The Government was insisting that such works should be completed well in time so that again the State may not suffer due to unprecedented floods just as happened last year.
The petitioner as a Chief Engineer acted under the orders of the Government.
The Government knew that additional funds have to be provided for construction of flood control projects.
The petitioner as a Chief Engineer was bound by the decision taken by the Committee under the Chairmanship of the Chief Secretary.
He was duty bound to execute the additional works for flood control measures approved by the Government vide Annexure P5.
The Government was fully conscious that additional funds have to be provided for the emergent works.
The Government even allotted additional funds vide Annexure P5.
They also reviewed the follow-up action vide Annexure P.9.
It is very surprising that the Successor Irrigation Secretary without noticing the various orders passed by the Government has tried to find fault with the petitioner who has got the flood control projects completed in spite of the fact that the funds were not immediately available.
Indeed Mr. Chatha, the Secretary in the ACR of the petitioner for the year 1989-90 has commended for the good work done by the petitioner in the matter of completion of flood control projects.
No fault can be found in the work of the petitioner when the petitioner has acted under the decisions of the Government taken from time to time, in the meetings chaired by the Chief Secretary.
If the petitioner had not carried the decisions taken in the meetings, it would have been an act of insubordination on his part.
The Government has consciously taken the decision to incur expenditure in excess of the budget provision and were finding ways and means to make up the deficit.
It is very difficult to pinpoint fault with the petitioner.
The Respondent-Secretary has not appreciated that he petitioner has acted strictly under the directions of the Government in incurring the expenditure for the flood control projects.
I am of the view that action regarding compulsory retirement cannot be taken on the basis of the report of the Deputy Secretary and Irrigation Secretary simply on the ground that the expenditure has been incurred in excess of the budget provisions.
The flood control measures which were required could not be completed within the budget provisions as is clear from the meeting chaired by the Chief Secretary and the Government consciously took the decision that the works should be completed and ways and means should be found out to provide additional funds.
As discussed earlier, there is nothing on the record which could show that the petitioner had doubtful integrity.
Therefore, there was no occasion to recommend the compulsory retirement of the petitioner.
16.
The other aspect of the matter to which I have given my anxious consideration is that the Government servant whose entire record of service is good or very good and the said service record is not used to evaluate or assess whether he should be retained in service or not, and the order of compulsory retirement has been passed on a solitary note of the Respondent- Secretary who had recommended Suspension/Departmental enquiry against the petitioner, the said order cannot be sustained, as the petitioner's integrity and efficiency was not doubted at any stage.
17.
Another significant fact which requires consideration at this stage is that the order of compulsory retirement had been passed on the basis of allegation that the petitioner exceeded the budget provisions in the matter of expenditure in tackling the flood situation.
These are definite allegations.
So the order of compulsory retirement is founded on definite allegations.
It will clearly amount to removal within the meaning of Article 311 of the Constitution of India.
In State of Uttar Pradesh v. Madan Mohan, A.I.R. 1967 S.C. 126, the Supreme Court considered the matter whether an order of compulsory retirement passed against a Government servant on the allegations that he had outlived his utility is an action by way of punishment so as to attract the constitutional guarantee of Article 311 of the Constitution.
Such an order cannot be passed without affording the petitioner an opportunity of hearing.
In view of the above legal position, the order of compulsory retirement could not be passed.
18.
As observed earlier, confidential reports of the petitioner were from good to very good and his integrity was not ever doubted.
State has failed to show that the petitioner misappropriated the funds.
19.
For the reasons aforesaid, the writ petition is allowed with costs and the impugned order of compulsory retirement of the petitioner, Annexure P-16, is quashed.
The petitioner shall be deemed to be in continuous service with all consequential benefits.
Petition allowed.