Constitution of India, Articles 14, 309 and 311 - Indian Contract Act, Sections 17, 18 and 19 - Appointment/Termination/Fraudulent Employment/Mis-representation - An employment contract may become voidable if it is procured through fraudulent means or mis-representation.
The other party must take action to avoid the contract, or else it remains effective until voided.
This means that the transaction does not automatically become void ab-initio, and a positive action is required to be taken to avoid it.
[Paras 7, 20 and 22]  B.
Constitution of India, Articles 309 and 311 - Contract of service - After a government employee enters into the Public Service, the contract of employment is governed by statutory rules or other applicable laws.
Any terms and conditions of the original contract become ineffective.
Therefore, the only way to terminate a government employee is following statutory procedures, even if their employment term was for a fixed term, ad hoc or temporary.
[Paras 8 and 9]  C. Constitution of India, Articles 14 and 311 - Principles of natural justice - Enquiry/Termination of service/Fraud/Mis-representation/Contract of employment - If an employee’s contract of employment was obtained through fraud or mis-representation, there is no need to follow the procedure of regular enquiry under the statutory rules, which become applicable only after entering into service.
In such cases, it is sufficient to give a show-cause notice and consider the employee’s explanation and supporting evidence before taking any action, which is necessary to comply with the principles of natural justice.
[Paras 20, 22 and 23]  D. Constitution of India, Articles 14 and 311 - Termination/Fraud/Mis-representation - When an employee is terminated on allegations of obtaining employment through fraud or mis-representation, it invalidates them from future government employment.
Therefore, a termination order cannot be passed solely on an ipso-dixit of the employer about fraud unless the employer has acted fairly to comply with the principles of natural justice before taking such drastic action.
[Paras 20, 21, 22 and 23]