Punjab University Calendar, Vol. III, 1990, Rule 2(d) - Migration/Education - Eligibility condition - To be eligible for migration, a student must have obtained more marks in the joint entrance test than the last candidate admitted in the college where they wish to migrate in their chosen discipline.
The petitioner's application for migration on compassionate grounds from Guru Nanak Engineering College, Ludhiana to Punjab Engineering College, Chandigarh in 1993 was rejected as they had secured fewer marks than the last student admitted in 1993.
However, this comparison is illogical, and the comparison should only be made to the last student admitted when the student seeking migration was first admitted to the college.
[Paras 8 and 9]

Constitution of India, Article 226, Punjab University Calendar, Vol. III, 1990 Rule 2(d) - Migration/Eligibility conditions - The petitioner applied for migration to Punjab Engineering College, Chandigarh on security grounds after appearing in the third semester of the B.E.
(Electrical) course at Guru Nanak Engineering College, Ludhiana.
After a recommendation from the Director General of Police, Punjab, and other concerned authorities, the matter was investigated and considered by the Home Secretary, Registrar, and Syndicate of Punjab University.
The petitioner was eventually allowed to migrate, and the registrar of Punjab University wrote to the principal of Punjab Engineering College, Chandigarh, to request that the petitioner be allowed to attend.
However, the petitioner's name was struck off the rolls of Guru Nanak Engineering College, Ludhiana, and they were subsequently denied migration because as per rules, migration was not allowed in the fourth semester, and no seats were available in the third semester.
The High Court issued a notice of motion, directed the Punjab Engineering College to give provisional admission to the petitioner in the third semester and allow them to attend classes in the fourth semester, but provisional admission was not given.
The petitioner filed a contempt petition, and the Supreme Court stayed the proceedings.
Other students who were ineligible for admission through standard procedures and had applied for migration were allowed to provisionally attend Punjab Engineering College, Chandigarh, while the writ petitions challenging the decision were heard.
The writ petitions were ultimately allowed, and these students were permitted to continue.
When the petitioner's writ petition came up for hearing, the respondents argued that no seat was available in the third semester.
However, in light of the circumstances of the case and the fact that ineligible candidates had been allowed to migrate, the petitioner deserves to be allowed to migrate either by cancelling the migration of the student who was last in merit or by creating an additional seat for them.
[Para 12]