The reliance on a circular stating that an officer cannot be held responsible for lapses in a former branch after three years is not a valid defense as circulars are only guidelines and cannot be enforced as a statutory right.
Additionally, subsequent circulars clarify that the original circular was not intended to prescribe a time limit in cases of serious misconduct [Para 45].
The challenge against an order of dismissal on the grounds of non-supply of 18 documents is not valid as the petitioner was given 144 out of the 162 documents on their list, and no grievance was made in reply to the enquiry report.
Furthermore, no prejudice was alleged, so the action taken on the enquiry report cannot be vitiated in law [Paras 60 & 61].
The departmental proceedings and penalty of dismissal of a retired employee require compliance with the 1995 Pension Regulations, which would be deemed to be under the same regulations as the earlier proceedings.
Since the jural relation of employer and employee gets snapped after superannuation, a penalty impinging on pensionary benefits is allowed as per 1995 Pension Regulations and an order of dismissal is illegal and quashed [Paras 86, 87, 95 to 97].
Regarding a quashing of the charges, allegations of misconduct that occurred between 16 and 19 years ago were made when accounts became sticky, and the disciplinary authority would consider the issue of delay if they proceeded to take action on the enquiry report [Para 57].
The reliance on un-exhibited portions of an inspection report is not a case of an unproved document being relied upon behind the back as the report was bulky, it was proved by a witness, and portions of the report were formally taken on record.
As the findings are not solely based on the report, the issue concludes against the petitioner [Para 63].
With the absence of showing that the findings of the enquiry officer are based on no evidence or which no reasonable person would arrive at, no judicial interference under Article 226 is warranted with regards to disciplinary proceedings [Paras 65 & 66].
The non-payment of provisional pension is not a valid reason to vitiate proceedings as the petitioner has not shown how the non-payment vitiates proceedings and how they could not effectively defend themselves [Paras 72 & 73].
According to pension regulations, if there is a finding that the charged officer has caused pecuniary loss to the bank, that can be recovered from gratuity.
Therefore, the withholding of gratuity was justified [Paras 103 & 104].
The findings in the report do bring out charges of misconduct as the charges establish abuse of official position by extending undue favors by ignoring pre-sanction appraisal, ignoring proper end use thereby jeopardizing bank's interest and exercising powers indiscreetly [Paras 101 & 103].