As per Section 2(d) of the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923, the parents of a deceased workman can claim compensation if they depend wholly or in part on the earning of the deceased.
The court held that although the father's income was insufficient, his dependency on the deceased was established through evidence which was not rebutted in cross-examination.
Therefore, the deceased's family definitely needed his earning.
[Para 11]

In cases where an application for compensation does not contain any averment regarding dependency, the appellant may raise a defence.
However, in this case, the respondent was able to provide convincing evidence to demonstrate their dependency on the deceased.
The court cannot adopt a nitpicking attitude to defeat the purpose of welfare legislation which is enacted to compensate poor families on death or injury caused during employment.
Therefore, the respondents are considered dependants.
[Para 12]

Section 12 of the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923 indicates that while the liability lies with the contractor, the workmen can proceed against the principal employer who would be indemnified by the contractor.
The construction of Section 12(2) reveals that the Act aims to secure compensation from the principal employer who may have employed contractors to do certain work which he would ordinarily have done through his servants.
The claimant need not prove the existence of a contractor, rather the principal employer is obligated to pay compensation and has a statutory right of indemnification from the contractor.
Therefore, non-joinder of a contractor cannot lead to the dismissal of an application for compensation.
[Paras 14, 18 and 20]

The Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923 is a piece of social welfare legislation with the object and reason to alleviate the sufferings of workmen and their dependants.
With the growing complexity of industry and consequent danger to workmen, the general approach of authorities should be in tune with this purpose.
Therefore, a technical approach that defeats the object of welfare legislation should not be taken to deprive the benefits to workmen or families.
[Para 7]