According to Punjab Civil Services Rules (applicable to Haryana) Vol. 1, Rule 44, promotion of J.B.T.
teachers as Head teachers requires one increment of higher responsibility for promotees.
Despite the definition of "the State" not being explanatory and restricted but extensive, Article 12 of the Constitution of India states that local authorities or authorities under the control of the State or Union of India will be the "State" within the meaning of Article 12.
Part III of the Constitution prohibits the State from doing certain things that infringe on any of the Fundamental Rights, while Part IV enforces that the State do certain things as a duty that is not enforceable in law.
The Court cannot ignore what Part IV mandates, and if the State breaches this duty by acting contrary to these Directive Principles, the Court can prevent this from happening.
[Paras 2 and 52 to 68]

Coalfield Limited is a government company incorporated under the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956, a subsidiary of Coal India Ltd, and an instrumentality of the policy of the Central Government subject to such directions as may be issued by the President of India from time to time with a view to exert control over the strategic areas of its economy.
All the higher authorities within the company are appointed by the President of India, who also has the power to issue directives in regard to the conduct of business and affairs of the company.
As such, the company is an instrumentality of the State within the meaning of Article 12.
[Paras 6.20 and 6.21]

An employee of a corporation, which is an instrumentality of the State cannot be considered a member of a civil service of the Union or an All India Service or holding any civil post within the meaning of Articles 310 and 311 of the Constitution.
While working as Chairman-cum-Managing Director of Coalfields Ltd, the petitioner cannot be said to be holding a "civil post" within the meaning of Articles 310 and 311.
However, he is entitled to the protection of his fundamental rights by virtue of Articles 14 and 16.
[Paras 71 to 74]

According to Article 226 of the Constitution of India, it is up to the Court to decide if the alleged motive in reality has become the foundation of a termination order with reference to the facts of a given case.
[Para 83]

Under Conduct, Discipline, and Appeal Rules (Coal India Ltd), 1978, Rule 27, if a contract is vitiated as being contrary to public policy, the party adversely affected by it can sue to have it declared void.
Public policy is not a particular policy of the Govt. but something that concerns the public good and public interest.
If an agreement is opposed to public policy as a whole, it must be adjudged as void.
If the terms of the contract have been capable of misuse by the dominating party and are unconscionable and used as a hire and fire rule, and some extraneous motive has become the foundation of termination of services, such an order of termination cannot sustain in the eye of the law.
[Paras 8.31 to 835 and 11]

According to the Constitution of India, Article 14, if an employee while appointed on a substantive post was appointed, transferred, or given charge of different positions of the same or higher posts, he continues to have his lien on his substantive post.
On removal or termination from the assigned positions, he will revert back to his substantial post.
If a clause of appointment on a contractual basis on a post that is not his substantive post is invoked, services from the substantial appointment cannot be deemed to be terminated.
He will automatically revert back to his substantial post and will retire on attaining the age of superannuation.
[Paras 12 and 13]

According to the Unfair Contract Terms Act, 1977, the Act does not apply to all contracts but only to certain clauses of the same.
The Act is not retrospective in its application.
However, it applies to liability for any loss or damage sustained on or after that date, from unreasonable and unfair terms of any contract even entered into before its enforcement.
[Para 827]