Punjab Civil Service (Executive Branch) Rules, 1930, Rules 5 and 6 and Proviso to Rule 5 - The government can lay down the procedure and select eligible personnel for the service from various departments.
If the government's selection is restricted to the sources specified in rule 6, it will be violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Punjab Civil Service (Executive Branch) Rules, 1930, Proviso to Rule 5 - Special Recruitment/Exigencies of service - The government can resort to Special Recruitment only in the exigencies of service.
Selection/Criteria of Merit/Good or Very Good reports/Discrimination - The criteria of laying down the merits of the candidates have been relaxed.
Once the claims of all the candidates are equally considered, there can be no legitimate reason to order a de novo consideration of the whole matter.
Extraneous Consideration/Mala fide/Discrimination/Vague allegation/Burden of proof - Allegations made without concrete proof cannot be entertained.
The burden of proving the charge of discrimination lies on the person who alleges it.
Punjab Civil Service (Executive Branch) Rules, 1930, Rules 5 and 6 - Special Recruitment - The persons in government service considered for special recruitment constitute a special class.
Petitioners who were not candidates for Special Recruitment cannot complain of denial of equal opportunity to them.
Proper parties - No decision can be given against persons who are not parties to the litigation without being heard.
Constitution of India, Articles 14 and 16 - Punjab Civil Service (Executive Branch) Rules, 1930, Rules 5 and 6 - Relations of high dignitaries/Selection - Relatives of high dignitaries have equal right to contest selections for recruitment.
The selection record produced in the Court showed fair consideration.
Punjab Civil Service (Executive Branch) Rules, 1930, Rules 5 and 6 - Selection Committee - The Public Service Commission agreed to constitute the Selection Committee.
Constitution of India, Articles 14 and 16 - Selection/Merits - Selected candidates found to be quite eligible and meritorious than the petitioner.
No infirmity can be found in the government's action.
Constitution of India, Articles 14 and 16 - Punjab Civil Service (Executive Branch) Rules, 1930, Rules 5 and 6 - Candidates recommended to the Commission for consideration had a better record of service and posted in higher ranks than the petitioners.
No arbitrariness or violation of Articles 14 and 16 can be alleged.
Constitution of India, Articles 14 and 16 - Punjab Civil Service (Executive Branch) Rules, 1930, Rules 5 and 6 - Government forwarded the name of the respondent who was 22 steps senior to the petitioner and was otherwise senior most in the panel.
Where two views are possible, the government can adopt a reasonable one.
Constitution of India, Articles 14 and 16 - Punjab Civil Service (Executive Branch) Rules, 1930, Rules 5 and 6 - Petitioner had no better claim to the position.
Even if the service record of two officials is found to be equally good, the government's action cannot be accused of arbitrariness.
Constitution of India, Articles 14 and 16 - Punjab Civil Service (Executive Branch) Rules, 1930, Rules 5 and 6 - Reservation/Direct Recruitment/Promotion/Special Recruitments - Special recruitment is neither a direct recruitment nor promotion.
In such a situation, it is for the State to consider whether reservation should be made or not.
Constitution of India, Articles 14, 16 and 226 - Punjab Civil Service (Executive Branch) Rules, 1930, Rules 5 and 6 - All the candidates having good service record, it is only for the government to choose the better candidate.
The court can interfere only if a patent case of arbitrariness is made out.