The qualifications prescribed for the posts of language teachers in the statutory rules cannot be changed by an executive order issued by the government, as per Punjab Privately Managed Recognised Schools Employees (Security of Service) Act, 1979 - Sections 15, 3 and 5.
Conditions of service governing employees in privately managed recognised schools are governed by the provisions of the Act.
The statutory rules governing appointment of teachers in a privately managed school only require them to possess the qualifications of matric Sanskrit with OT The instructions in the letter that a person should possess qualifications of BA with Sanskrit as an elective subject and should also have passed B.Ed.
with Sanskrit as a teaching subject are contrary to the provisions of the Rules and cannot be enforced until the statutory rules are amended in accordance with the provisions of the Act.
[Para 5]
As per practice and law, statutory rules cannot be amended by an executive order.
Any executive order issued in violation of the statutory rules is untenable in law and set aside.
The amended qualifications are not applicable to the petitioner, and the action of the respondents in enforcing these qualifications against the petitioner and stopping the payment of his salary is unteneble in law.
The respondents are directed to treat the petitioner as a qualified person, as per Constitution of India, Articles 226/227, 16 - Punjab Schools Employees (Security of Service) Act, 1979, Sections 15, 3 and 5 - Punjab Privately Managed Recognized Schools Employees (Security of Service) Rules, 1981, Rule 6.
[Paras 5 and 7]
Any subsequent alteration of qualifications by an executive order cannot have any retrospective effect.
The petitioner was fully qualified for appointment as a Sanskrit teacher on the relevant date when he was selected by the Managing Committee.
The change in qualification has no impact on his appointment as it cannot be applied retrospectively, as per Punjab Privately Managed Recognized Schools Employees (Security of Service) Act, 1979, Sections 15, 3 and 5 - Punjab Privately Managed Recognized Schools Employees.
(Security of Service) Rules, 1981, Rule 6.
[Para 6]