The Constitution of India's Articles 14 and 16 regulates the admission of candidates in Post Graduate Medical/Dental Surgery courses in regards to reservation.
There's a quota and rota system in place for filling up the 60% and 40% quota of seats reserved for general and SC/BC candidates.
Left out/surrendered seats and seats not occupied offered in reserved quota can go to candidates of the same category and institute-wise.
It's not mandatory to follow the reservation and quota system in filling up left out seats, but the surrendered and unoccupied seats offered in the quota fixed should go to candidates of the same category and institute-wise.
Conversion is allowed, and vacant seats have to be filled on a running roster system, and not seat for seat.
The ratio of reservation is likely to be disturbed, but it won't affect the admission process if the roster prepared at the first stage does not transgress the outer limit of reservation.
[Paras 21, 22 and 29]

The Constitution of India's Articles 14 and 16 regulate the admission of candidates in Post Graduate Medical/Dental Surgery courses in regards to eligibility.
If the eligibility rule requires the candidate having secured at least 40% marks in the competitive examination and the speciality in which admission is sought, the candidate cannot be eligible only by securing 40% marks in competitive exams without securing 40% marks in the subject in which speciality they want admission.
Even if there is some printing error in the instructions, qualified candidates of the doctor's standard is presumed to have knowledge of eligibility.
[Para 23]

The Constitution of India's Articles 14 and 16 regulate the admission of candidates in Post Graduate Medical/Dental Surgery courses in regards to rural practice experience.
There's a condition of eligibility that the candidate should have three years of rural practice experience.
The Punjab Govt. has issued instructions dated 922000, stating that the candidate may execute and file an affidavit along with the application to complete the rural experience.
The condition of three years of rural service loses its significance at the time of admission to the course.
[Paras 24 to 26]