The petitioner, a Lt Colonel, seeks to quash the proceedings of the court of enquiry due to a violation of Regulation 518.
Regulation 518 requires that the presiding officer of the court of enquiry be senior in rank and other members be at least equivalent in rank to the officer against whom the enquiry is being initiated.
However, the enquiry officer holding the rank of Lt.
Colonel and the members are of the rank of Major.
It has been held that the rules and regulations so promulgated have the force of law and are mandatory.
Thus, the convening order has been passed in violation of Regulation 518, and the enquiry being conducted in violation of statutory provisions would not be used by the commanding officer for passing the order of court marshal.
Therefore, the order of convening court of enquiry in violation of mandatory rules is quashed accordingly.
[Paras 7, 20 to 23, 29, 32 and 33]

The petitioner was not given the opportunity to cross-examine all the witnesses as envisaged in Rule 22(1) of the Army Rules.
Although the proviso to Rule 22(1) says that if the opportunity has been granted under Rule 180, it cannot be granted under Rule 22(1), the petitioner was not given the opportunity as envisaged under Army Rule 180.
Six witnesses out of sixteen examined witnesses were allowed to be cross-examined, and the process and procedure adopted being in derogation of rules is not sustainable under law.
Therefore, the Rule in question being mandatory, the proceedings are quashed accordingly.
[Paras 7, 24, 25, 29, 30, and 33]

The respondent contended that no cause of action or any part thereof has accrued to the petitioner within the Territorial Jurisdiction of this court and thus, the petition is not maintainable.
However, since proceedings have been held or part thereof have been held at Chandigarh, and the petitioner being placed in a low medical category, attached at Palampur, although the proceeding had commenced in Leh initially, the cause of action has arisen in favor of the petitioner to evoke the extraordinary writ jurisdiction of this court.
[Paras 10, 13 and 15]