Punjab Civil Service Rules, Volume I, Part I - Punjab Civil Service Rules, Volume II, Rule 5.32(A)(C) - Premature retirement - The respondents contend that the petitioner had earned only 50% good reports during the last 10 years, and therefore had to be retired according to instructions - The petitioner failed to invalidate notice of retirement - Rules, instructions, and judicial precedents analyzed to identify emerging propositions.
[Para 24]

From analysis of Rules, instructions, and the previous judicial precedents, it is clear that employers need not comply with natural justice principles before issuing an order of premature retirement.
An order of premature retirement is not a punishment and does not affect the employee's reputation.
If the order of retirement is punitive, however, an inquiry with adherence to rules and justice principles is mandatory.
The decision to retire an employee is to be taken by the government/appropriate authority.
The satisfaction of the government has to be formed on an objective consideration of the relevant factors, and it takes into account the entire record of service before taking a decision.
If a government servant is promoted to higher positions despite adverse reports, such reports will lose their significance.
Administrative instructions can serve as guidelines while issuing premature retirement orders, but they cannot control the discretion of the appropriate authority.
If the record of the employee shows positive improvement in later years despite average or poor entries in earlier years, then the power of compulsory premature retirement must have cogent reasons.
The power of judicial review can interfere with the statutory provisions governing the exercise of such powers.
[Para 24]

Punjab Civil Service Rules, Volume II, Rule 3.26(d) - Premature retirement - The power conferred upon the appointing authority is absolute and unbridled, although it is always subject to judicial review.
The appointing authority must apply its mind independently to the record of the employee and as to the employee's suitability for continuing in service.
Guidelines issued by the Government must be taken into consideration while doing so.
[Paras 26 and 27]

Punjab Civil Service Rules, Volume II, Rules 3.26(d) - Premature retirement - The competent authority's considerations while assessing the appellant's suitability differ - The matter was not examined correctly by the learned single judge - The matter was decided based on instructions that the appellant was not entitled to be continued in service beyond 55 years of age - The order of premature retirement is set aside.
[Paras 31 and 32]