Rule 8 and Rule 18 of Punjab Civil Services (Executive Branch) (Class I) Rules, 1976 are applicable and Article 14, Article 16, and Article 226/227 of the Indian Constitution are also applicable in the context of giving appointment to vacant posts.
The petitioner is seeking mandamus to direct the respondents to fill the vacant posts from amongst the candidates from Register A-II of PCS (Executive Branch) (Class I) following the Government Instructions and also to appoint petitioners to PCS (Executive Branch) (Class I) to such posts based on the merit prepared by PPSC.
The state government has filled the vacant posts from Register-B, but the same benefit has not been extended to accepted persons from Register A I, A II, A III, and Register-C, which is arbitrary and discriminatory.
The actions of the respondents would result in an imbalance in service and could give rise to irreconcilable disputes such as seniority and others.
[Para 21]

The appointment to vacant posts can be made from one source while keeping in abeyance appointments from other sources if appointments are being made from two different sources.
It is open to the appointing authority to recruit persons from one source by giving preference of filling up anticipated vacancies and denying the same to the other source.
However, when appointments are being made to a post from different sources in pursuance of a common examination and interviews, the appointment should be made based on merit.
The action of the respondents in not following the instructions in the case of accepted candidates borne on Register A-II, while following the same in the case of candidates belonging to Register-B, is arbitrary and discriminatory and cannot be sustained.
[Para 21]

The record of result prepared by the Commission of PCS (EB) nominations from Register A-II is not to find out how many names were recommended by the Commission, but rather to provide information on the recommended candidates.
Only seven names were recommended by the Commission, and no merit list was prepared by the Commission of candidates from Register A-II, but other candidates from Register A-II have not approached the High Court within six months.
Based on the observations made in C.W.P.
No. 9908 of 1990, it is directed that the claim of the petitioners for appointment to the post of PCS (EB) (Class-I) from Register A-II should be considered, and appointments should be made.
[Para 22]