Punjab Civil Service (Executive Branch) Rules, 1930 (As applicable to Haryana).
Rule 7(1) and (2) - Candidates working as Tehsildars/Naib Tehsildars for appointment to H.C.S.
need to follow the selection procedure of entry into Register A-1 and indicate starting selection process.
Selection process and final action is at the discretion of the State Government, with a date fixed for initiation of selection process.
Qualification can be relaxed or modified by the government only.
[Paras 3 and 4]

Punjab Government Civil Service (Executive Branch) Rules, 1930 (As applicable to Haryana), Rule 7(2) - Screening Committee made of Chief Secretary and two other members with function of preparing list of eligible/suitable candidates.
Selection Commission takes list into consideration as selection by the Committee on merits.
[Para 5]

Writ Jurisdiction of Public Service Commission that has inherent jurisdiction to adopt any device, modes and methods in effective discharge of its functions.
High Court's jurisdiction to review its assessments is normally not allowed, unless the arbitrariness is high.
[Para 7]

Public Service Commission written statement discrepancy issues of facts wrongly mentioned and falsified stand.
The merit determined by the screening Committee was on a better footing qua service record of the candidate, which contradicted the Commission.
The Bench called for the record to clarify.
[Para 9]

Criteria for selection should be laid out before receipt of service records.
Whenever criteria is laid out after the receipt of whole record and data, the selection may become tailor-made.
Justification of calling criteria adopted by the Commission and the result sheets for perusal in the peculiar circumstances of the case.
[Para 10]

Public Service Commission function is only to recommend, not to lay or upset eligibility qualifications.
Its role is in considering the six candidates and ensuring that three are chosen based on merit.
As a result, the criteria adopted by the Commission transgressed its authority and to that extent is untenable.
[Para 13]

Negative marking for higher age and different heads mark leading to a distorted picture is unfair, making the selection null and void.
Age criteria is not bad, but not fairly implemented, which discourages the right candidates.
[Para 14]

Criteria used in selection were imperfect and incomplete, causing unfairness in the selection process.
The annual confidential reports (ACRs) used in assessing the candidates had different periods, which was not a fault of the candidate.
[Para 15]

Experience is a determining factor in selection and should not only rely on ACRs.
The selection process must consider the period that a candidate worked for such service.
The current process cannot deny a candidate experience for a period where ACRs were not recorded.
[Para 17]