Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923, Schedule II, Clause (VIII) - Workman - The deceased was employed for construction work on the building being repaired and is therefore considered a workman.
[Para 12]
Interpretation of Statutes - Sub-clause (a) of the Schedule II clause (VIII) in the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923 should be read disjunctively since "or" is used to separate its various parts and not "comma".
[Para 12]
Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923, Section 2(n) - Workman - The deceased was employed by the Trust in connection with the extensive repairs or replacement of the roof, which is considered the employer's trade or business, making him a workman.
[Para 14]
Trusts Act, 1982, Section 28 - Although under Section 28 of the Act, the trustees could not act singly, the Trust cannot use this as an excuse for not passing a resolution regarding the employment of the deceased and other workmen to carry out the repair work.
This does not exempt the Trust from the payment of compensation to the deceased's heirs as he was considered a workman under the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923, Section 2(n).
[Para 13]
Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923, Section 2(n) - The determination of whether employment is of a casual nature or not will depend on the facts and circumstances of each case.
The burden of proof that employment was casual rests on the employer to discharge.
If the employer fails, it would follow that the workman is covered under the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923.
[Para 15]
Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923, Section 2(n) - The deceased employee, who was employed to execute repairs on the building in question, is considered a workman under the Act.
Thus, his heirs are entitled to compensation under the provisions of the Act.
[Para 15]
Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923, Section 4 - A mistake made by a poor workman who claims compensation in a sum less than what he is actually entitled to does not prevent the Commissioner from awarding him the rightful compensation under the Act.
[Para 18]