Per the majority view of MY Kawoosa and Sharma, J: The rule of 1:3 reservation for degree and diploma holders in the public service is impermissible and invalid.
The appointment of highly qualified technical personnel to positions of responsibility is in the larger interest of society, and efficiency in service must be emphasized.
Diploma is an inferior qualification to a degree, and the higher qualification should be the basis for any discriminative classification.
The ratio of three posts for diploma holders and one for degree holders converts the merit of a higher qualification into de-merit and rewards an inferior qualification.
If such a reservation is allowed, the feeding cadre of degree holders for promotion to higher cadres will go dry, leading to chaos and adversely affecting public interest and efficiency of service.
The impugned Note 3 appended to Schedule II-A of SRO 180 of 1997 is ultra vires the Constitution.
The rule or statutory provision must satisfy two tests - the classification must be based on an intelligible differentia that distinguishes persons or things and have a reasonable relation to the object sought to be achieved.
The legislative bias in favour of less qualified persons does not promote efficiency and has no nexus with the purpose of the service.
The executive has to adopt a pragmatic approach to harmonize the requirements of public service to ensure equality on a realistic basis.
Per Arun K. Goyal, J: The ratio of 1:3 reservation for degree and diploma holders is justified and constitutionally valid because the degree holder can be considered for the post of Assistant Engineer through PSC which is a gazetted post.
The diploma holder can only be considered for the post of Junior Engineer and requires more years of service to be eligible for promotion.
It cannot be said that there is any discrimination while fixing the ratio, and the Article 14 application provides every citizen to be treated alike without any discrimination.
The State ought to provide effective provisions for securing the right to work.
Per the dissenting views of Sharma, J: The reservation fixed on the basis of qualifications of entry after grouping eligible candidates together is impermissible under Article 16.
Higher educational qualification is permissible for classification to achieve efficiency in service and not to provide employment.
The ratio of 1:3 reservation for degree and diploma holders has no rational nexus to the object sought to be achieved by the Constitution and recruitment to Engineering Service.
The classification is not founded on any intelligible differentia to distinguish when they have been grouped together for eligibility, nor does the differentia have any rational nexus to the object sought to be achieved.