Constitution of India, Article 14 - Promotion - Reversion - Service record - The petitioner was promoted by the Government as Private Secretary subject to approval of Public Service Commission which found the petitioner unsuitable.
The Government reverted the petitioner, and his reversion is not penal.
The Commission decision was based on his service record, and his claim was considered but rejected.
The action taken cannot be deemed arbitrary, unfair, or violative of Article 16 of the Constitution.
No person with an adverse record was promoted, nor was anything overlooked.
[Para 6]

Constitution of India, Article 14 - Promotion - Efficiency Bar - The criteria for crossing the efficiency bar and promotion are different.
A report that is three or four years old may be ignored while considering the claim to cross the efficiency bar.
However, for promotion, an official's suspected integrity may be a consideration for the authority to leave him out, and a person of good integrity may be preferred.
Therefore, an officer cannot claim promotion only because he was allowed to cross efficiency bar despite an adverse report of doubtful integrity.
[Para 7]

Constitution of India, Articles 14 and 16 - Promotion - Supersession - The petitioner's subjective promotion was not approved and was reverted.
Later, his junior colleagues were promoted without considering his claim again.
After promoting the petitioner, his claim for retrospective promotion was rejected by the Commission because he was declared unsuitable before the date of his regular promotion.
The petitioner cannot allege that his claim was not considered while promoting his juniors.
[Para 8]

Constitution of India, Article 226 - Promotion - Reversion - Rejection of representation against reversion - The petitioner is challenging only the order of the rejection of his representation without challenging the reversion order in the writ petition.
No effective relief can be granted as the order of reversion is not in issue.
[Para 9]