Constitution of India, Articles 16 and 136 - Pay/Special Pay - Fixation of special pay on notional basis - Special pay of Rs. 35 per month is attached to certain identified posts in the senior clerks category.
Respondents who are senior clerks not working against these identified posts are promoted as Head Clerks and their pay fixed taking into account their pay as a senior clerk.
On the other hand, juniors posted against the identified posts and promoted as Head clerks have their pay fixed by including the special pay in their pay scale.
Consequently, the respondents promoted earlier are getting paid less than juniors promoted later.
As a result, the respondents approached the tribunal for refixation of pay claiming special pay on the notional basis in the Head clerks cadre.
However, the tribunal rejected this claim.
Still, considering that juniors getting a higher salary than respondents, the tribunal stepped up the salary of respondents on equitable considerations so that they should not get less than their juniors.
An appeal is preferred to challenge the order of the tribunal.
The High Court held that only those senior clerks posted against identified posts could claim special pay.
The respondents who were already promoted to a higher category of head clerks could not claim special pay, even on a notional basis.
Thus, the Tribunal rightly rejected this claim.
[Paras 3 and 6]

Constitution of India, Articles 16 and 136 - Fixation of pay - Fundamental rules - Stepping up - The order of the tribunal to step up the salary of the respondent was challenged in the appeal.
Under the provisions of fundamental rules for removing the anomaly of Government servants on promotion or appointment, the principle of stepping up of the pay is applied.
The pay of the senior officer in the higher post is required to be stepped up to a figure equal to the pay as fixed for the Junior officer in that higher post.
The stepping up is required to be done with effect from the date of promotion or appointment of the Junior officer.
The principle of stepping up becomes applicable when the junior officer and senior officer belong to the same category and post from which they have been promoted, and in the promoted cadre, the junior officer, on being promoted later, gets a higher pay.
It was further held that the Tribunal directed to apply the principle of stepping up, and there is no infirmity with the same direction.
Thus, the appeal was dismissed.
[Para 7]