A Notification under Section 4 of the Army Act allows all or any provisions of the Army Act to be applicable to any force in India and may suspend any other enactment for the time being applicable to the said force.
Assam Rifles does not become the regular army by mere notification under Section 4 of the Army Act.
The post of DGAR in Assam Rifles is within the Ministry of Home Government of India, not within the Indian Army's hierarchy.
Officers from the regular army are posted to various positions in Assam Rifles, including Director-General.
The post of DGAR is a deputation post for Army officers.
The term "Military Service of the Union" does not mean that an officer is deemed posted in the regular army wherever they are posted.
[Paras 15 to 19] B.
The posts of Corp & Commanders, Principal Staff Officers, and Director-General in Assam Rifles are interchangeable.
There is no selection criterion when making appointments to the posts.
[Para 13] C. Officers selected for Command & Staff Stream are to be promoted first on Command or Staff appointments and only thereafter the officers selected for Staff-only Stream are promoted.
On promotion to the Command & Staff Stream, it is not mandatory for an officer to be given a command appointment immediately.
It may not be practical to provide command posts due to non-availability of such posts.
[Paras 9, 10 & 11] D The Indian Army is command-oriented, where every officer looks to a command post.
Denial of command posting to senior officers and granting them to junior officers in the same rank causes discontentment or heart-burning amongst officers holding higher ranks.
The policy of giving command posts to young Lt.
Generals is not always healthy if it results in posting seniors under the command of junior officers, which likely leads to discontentment amongst the senior Lt.
Generals.
It may adversely affect the moral of the organization, and therefore, authorities are required to frame proper guidelines and policy to eliminate discontentment.
[Para 12]