Constitution of India, Articles 136 and 141 - Constitution Bench opinion - Binding effect on subsequent Constitution Benches - Contention that opinion of a Constitution Bench is binding on the following Constitution Bench was rejected - Constitution Court has a duty to form its own opinion on the case and consider the precedent's effect by re-reading instead of relying on a precedent's gloss placed by another decision.
[Para 4]
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, Section 25-O (as amended by the Amendment Act 46 of 1982) - U.P.
Industrial Disputes Act, Section 6-W - Constitutional validity - Closure - Natural justice - Opportunity for a hearing - Public interest - Scope of discretion by the Government: Section 20-O of Central Act and Section 6-W of U.P.
Act are identical.
[Para 1]
Natural justice - Opportunity for a hearing - After the amendment, the employer, workmen, and all interested parties must be given the opportunity for a hearing before passing an order - The Government is required to hold an inquiry, and the order must be well-reasoned.
[Para 11]
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, Section 25-O(3) - Time limit for permission grant or refusal order - The Amended Section 25-O has established a 60-day period under Sub-section (3).
[Para 13]
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, Section 25-O(4) - Time limit - Prior to amendment, there was no limit for reconsideration after the permission for closure was refused - However, this has now been remedied by Sub-section (4) of Amended Section 25-O.
[Para 12]
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, Section 25-O(5) - Review - A provision for review has been made - The Government may review its order granting or refusing permission or refer the matter for adjudication- Review should be decided after hearing all involved parties - Orders of permission, or review refusal or grant, refer to quasi-judicial orders - The remedy of judicial review under Articles 226 and 32 of the Constitution is available against the same.
The time limit for disposal of the review should not exceed a reasonable period or 60 days.
[Paras 14 and 16]
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, Section 25-O(7) and (8) - Notice and retrenchment compensation - The employer must still give notice and compensation specified in Section 25-N - However, the requirement of providing three months of notice has been eliminated - The compensation equivalent to fifteen days of average pay for every completed year of continuous service must be paid.
[Para 17]
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, Section 26-O - Differences after amendment - The Amended Section 25-O is substantially different from what it was before - Restriction as required under Article 19(6) are present and are reasonable in the public interest's context - Amended Section 25-O lays down guidelines that must be followed - Compliance with the allowable reasons for closure does not necessarily mean that permission to close must be given - If it is still not in the public interest, permission to close could be denied or postponed for some time if required - However, the employer can demonstrate that continuing the establishment has become impossible - The term "in the interest of general public" should not be viewed as vague if it is not vague in the Constitution Article 19(6) - Amended Section 25-O is constitutionally valid and fully complies with Supreme Court observations.
[Paras 18, 22 and 23]