The Kerala Public Service Commission (Additional Functions) Act 1963, Sections 3(1)(a) & (b) and 5 - Kerala State and Subordinate Rules, 1958, Rules 27 and 39 - Regulations - Promotions - The Board requires consultation with the Public Service Commission for all recruitment methods and principles of appointments, promotions, and transfers.
However, the Kerala Public Service Commission (Additional Functions) (Consultations) Rules, 1966, Rules 3 and 5 state that the Commission's consent is only necessary to continue temporary appointments beyond three months, not for appointments that are shorter than three years.
As a result, the initial temporary appointments may not be unlawful since the Commission's advice was not obtained.
Although Section 3 of the 1963 Act does not have a provision comparable to Clause (1) of Article 320 of the Constitution, the latter half of Clause (b) is a self-contained, substantive provision, and as a result, Section 3 does not require the enactment of any additional provisions like Clause (1) of Article 320, which assesses the suitability of candidates by the Commission.
This is the purpose of the Act.
It would be contrary to the Act's objective to say that the Commission is not required to provide input on appointments, promotions, or transfers.
The Court should adopt an interpretation that promotes the Act's aim.
The second part of Clause (b) of Sub-section (1) of Section 3 mandates consultation with the Commission for appointments of Assistant Engineers in the Board.
[Paras 6 and 7] B Kerala State and Subordinate Rules, 1958, Rule 27 - Kerala Public Service Commission (Additional Functions) Act, 1963, Sections 3(2) and 4 - Seniority - Services regularisation - The Public Service Commission must be consulted - The Government has overriding power - In specific classifications of appointments, there is no requirement to consult the Commission.
Where there are divergent views between the Board and the Commission over the regularization of employee services, the state government has the final say.
Once the Government regularizes an employee's service, that period of service will be considered toward seniority in regular service under Rule 27 of the Kerala State Subordinate Rules.
[Para 8]