University Grants Commission Act, 1956, Section 2(f) - The Chhattisgarh Niji Kshetra Vishwavidyalaya (Sthapana Aur Viniyaman) Adhiniyam, 2002, Sections 5 and 6 - The constitutionality of Sections 5 and 6 of the Chhattisgarh 2002 Act is in question as they violate the provisions of the UGC Act and Parliament's power under Entry 66 of Union List to establish and maintain standards in institutions for higher education like universities.
Any university established and recognized must follow the mandatory provisions of the UGC Act and those of the Indian Constitution.
Universities notified under the Scheme of its Sections 4, 5 & 6 would be non-existent unless they are affiliated with existing universities and fulfill the necessary conditions.
[Paras 22, 26, 28, 31, 32, 35, 44 and 45]

University Grants Commission Act, 1956, Section 2(f) - Right to Grant of degree and a Doctorate degree - The conferment of a degree assumes that the holder has reached a higher level of knowledge and study in the subject and possesses the necessary proficiency and expertise.
However, no university or institute should be granted the right to grant higher education degrees unless it strictly adheres to the statutory provisions of the UGC Act and the Constitution, and meets all the required standards of infrastructure and education.
UGC determines teaching curriculum and examination standards in various universities and the central government's rules and regulations ensure coordination and standardization.
[Paras 23, 24, 29 to 31 and 39]

Constitution of India, Entry 32 of List II and Entry 25 of List III and Entry 66 of Union List - The power of states and Union to legislate on higher education - The legislative competence to coordinate and establish standards in institutions for higher education or research and scientific and technical institutions lies with Parliament alone.
The UGC Act was made with reference to Entry 66, rendering any state legislation that stultifies or nullifies an act made by Parliament ultra vires.
[Paras 30 and 32]

University Grants Commission Act, 1956, Section 2(f) - The Chhattisgarh Niji Kshetra Vishwavidyalaya (Sthapana Aur Viniyaman) Adhiniyam, 2002, Section 4(1) - The issue of "carrying out any or all of objects" in Section 4(1) of the Chhattisgarh 2002 Act indicates that a university can be established for only one of the stated objectives.
This provision is beyond the legislative competence of the State legislature, ultra vires the Constitution, and should be struck down.
The relevant entries in List II and List III of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution do not contemplate the creation of such universities.
[Para 33]

The Chhattisgarh Niji Kshetra Vishwavidyalaya (Sthapana Aur Viniyaman) Adhiniyam, 2002, Sections 2(e) & (j) and 24 (as amended in 2004) - The amending Act 2004 does not make any significant changes in the notification for establishing a university.
[Paras 34 and 35]

The Chhattisgarh Niji Kshetra Vishwavidyalaya (Sthapana Aur Viniyaman) Adhiniyam, 2002, Sections 4(1)(b)(ii), 5 and 6 (as amended in 2004) - Lease of land for establishing a university - The acknowledgment of land on 30 years lease for establishing a university in Section 5 and 6 is not enough since no one would make a heavy expenditure in constructing buildings for a university on land on lease for only 30 years.
The amended Sections 5 and 6 suffer from the same problem as the original and are ultra vires the Constitution.
[Para 35]

University Grants Commission (Establishment of and Maintenance of Standards in Private Universities) Regulations, 2003, Regulation 31 - Private universities - A private university may only be established by a separate Act or one compendious Act where the legislature provides for the same specifically.
However, Section 5(1)(b) of the 2004 amended Act does not conform to the Regulations since it requires only an executive order to establish a university when only the State, exercising its sovereign power, or through a legislative enactment may establish a private university for higher education with the infrastructural facilities and qualities required to justify the status of a university.
[Paras 38 and 39]

University Grants Commission Act, 1956, Sections 2(f), 22 & 23 - Private Universities - The term "Established or incorporated" in Sections 2(f), 22 & 23 of the UGC Act applies to private universities concerned.
The Chhattisgarh Niji Kshetra Vishwavidyalaya (Sthapana Aur Viniyaman) Adhiniyam, 2002, Sections 2(f), 2(g), 3(7) - Out of state universities - Extra-territorial operation of legislation - Only Parliament is competent to make laws for the entire Indian territory; states cannot make extra-territorial laws.
The Chhattisgarh Act, which allows a university to establish an off-campus center outside the State, is beyond the legislative competence since it makes provision enabling an establishment to operate outside the territorial jurisdiction of the state.
[Para 42]

The Chhattisgarh Niji Kshetra Vishwavidyalaya (Sthapana Aur Viniyaman) Adhiniyam, 2002, Sections 4(1-A), 4(1)(b) to (e) and 5(1) (as amended in 2004) - Cancellation of university notification for non-fulfilling criteria of basic infrastructure - Many private universities have challenged the provisions of the amended Act as they appear to prefer the right to confer degrees and earn money without creating infrastructure.
However, the validity of these provisions is left open since Sections 5 and 6 have been declared ultra vires.
[Para 42]