The motion for removal of a Supreme Court Judge can be made by Members of Parliament, and the lapsing of motion with dissolution of House Parliament jurisdiction of Court remaining to so declare.
The motion will remain pending until a committee constituted submits its report, but law made by Parliament and binding on the house can be providing against doctrine of lapse.
[Paras 32, 33]

There is a constitutional process for the removal of a Supreme Court Judge, including admission of motion, constitution of committees, and recording of findings by it.
These proceedings are not considered proceedings in the House of Parliament, and the matter is not remaining outside the court's jurisdiction until that point.
[Para 56]

Prior proof of misconduct is a condition precedent for lifting the bar against discussing conduct of a judge in Parliament.
The removal of a judge is covered under Article 124, and rules made under Article 118 are not applicable as this article is a general provision conferring on each House of Parliament the power to make its own rules of procedure.
[Paras 50, 51]

The Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968 is constitutional and intra vires for removing a Supreme Court Judge.
Admission of motion involves the Speaker of the house constituting committee for investigating misbehavior capacity of Judge, but the Speaker is not acting as part of the House.
The Act is not unconstitutional as abridging powers and privileges of the house, as Articles 118, 119, and 124 of the Constitution do not support this.
[Para 56]

Affording the opportunity of hearing to a judge is not required under Article 124 of the Constitution for the removal of a Supreme Court Judge.
The Speaker of the house admits motion and constitutes a committee for investigating misbehavior or incapacity.
[Para 59]

An inquiry into the alleged misbehavior or incapacity of a judge cannot result in restraining the judge from discharging judicial functions.
[Para 62]

A case of mala fides against the speaker, who admits the motion for the removal of a Supreme Court Judge, cannot be based on his political affiliation.
However, mala fides must be established on solid grounds in Section 3 of the Judges Act and Articles 32 and 124 of the Constitution.
[Para 65]

The Sub-Committee on the Judicial Accountability and Supreme Court Bar Association has locus standi for maintaining the proceedings for the removal of a Supreme Court Judge on the ground of misbehavior or incapacity.
The motion in the house of people involves important constitutional issues, and a petition by the Supreme Court Bar Association is maintainable under Article 32 of the Constitution.
[Para 66]

Filing a writ petition for declaring that the motion for the removal of a Supreme Court Judge not to lapse on dissolution of the House of people has no occasion for consideration.
This is because the Union Government is seeking interpretation of the legal position for regulating its action.
[Para 71]

When interpreting statutes such as the Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968, considering the entire background is permissible, like dropping of 1964 Bill on opinion expressed by Joint Committee and passing of Act of 1968 on a subsequent Bill.
[Para 69]

Before the enactment of the Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968, Parliament was free to proceed as it liked.
However, the binding force of the act upon Parliament is now established, according to LM Sharma, J, in Article 124(4) of the Constitution.
[Paras 89 and 91]