Article 217 of the Constitution of India states rules for the appointment of Members and Presidents of the CEGAT.
Retired Judges may be appointed for a period of three years at the most and their age of superannuation cannot exceed 62 years, while serving Judges can also be appointed.
Rule 10(4) needs to change in order to make the position of President of CEGAT sufficiently attractive for a sitting Judge of High Court to accept this appointment.
The Government, in consultation with the Chief Justice of India, must appoint a sitting Judge of High Court as President of CEGAT to instill confidence in the litigating public.
Rule 10(1) of the CEGAT Members (Recruitment and Conditions of Service) Rules, 1987 gives power to the Central Government to appoint one of the Members as President of the tribunal.
Under Rule 10(1), the Court cannot interfere with the appointment of a qualified and eligible person under these rules, and has no right to judge the person chosen by the Central Government.
The appointment of respondent No. 3 cannot be questioned on the grounds of adverse reports regarding his track record.
The Customs, Excise and Gold Control Appellate Tribunal has been accused of malfunctioning, and allegations are grave.
It is the responsibility of the administrative machinery to supervise the workings of the tribunal and take prompt action to examine allegations.
A high-level team should immediately inspect CEGAT, identify the causes of crises and suggest remedial measures without any delay.
The Evidence Act 1872, Sections 123, 124 and 162, and Article 74(2) of the Constitution of India deal with evidence related to affairs of the State.
The decision to disclose a document depends on the competing aspects of public interest, whether the public interest in not producing the document is greater than the public interest in providing relevant evidence to a court of justice.
However, by the operation of Section 162 of the Act, the final decision regarding the validity of an objection against disclosure will always lie with the Court.
Article 323A and 323B of the Constitution of India relate to the Constitution and working of various tribunals in the country.
Complaints have been heard in regard to functioning of tribunals, and the Law Commission of India has recommended measures to improve their functioning.
The Commission has suggested undertaking an exercise on priority basis regarding the Constitution of Tribunals under various statutes.
Article 75(4) of the Constitution of India requires Ministers to file an affidavit stating grounds or reasons in support of a claim from public interest immunity.
They must also obey rule nisi or discovery order nisi and act in aid of the Court.
The Oath of Office of Secrecy enumerated in Article 75(4) and Schedule III of the Constitution does not absolve Ministers from their duty.