Writ Petition (Civil) No. 71/1993.
A.
Constitution of India, Articles 234, 235 and 233 - Judicial Service/Appointment of Judicial Officers/Selection of judicial officers/Eligibility of Judicial Officers - It is mandated that all states must provide a minimum of three years' legal practice experience as an essential qualification for appointment to the lowest rank in judicial service.
When the selection of judicial officers is made by the Public Service Commission, the Selection Committee must include a representative of the High Court.
The selection committee should take into account the High Court representative's opinion regarding the suitability of the candidate, which can only be disregarded with strong and proper reasons recorded in writing.
In accordance with these provisions, states should amend their recruitment rules.
[Paras 22 and 23]  B Constitution of India, Articles 234 and 235 - Judicial Service/Retirement/Superannuation age - It is permissible to extend the age of retirement from 58 years to 60 years for judicial officers.
However, benefit cannot be granted automatically and should only be given after a Committee of High Court Judges assesses the suitability of the judicial officer.
Those found unfit must retire compulsorily at the age of 58 years.
Those who intend to retire at the age of 58 years should give written notice.
[Paras 28 to 31 and 45(b)]  C. Constitution of India, Article 235 - Judicial Service/Judicial Officers/Allowance of the judicial officers - States are directed to provide residential office-cum-library, sumptuary allowance, residential accommodation, independent vehicles to the Principal District Judges and Chief Judicial Magistrates, and pool vehicles for all other judges - one for every five judges for transport from residence to court and back.
States must additionally provide loan facilities for vehicles and free petrol up to a limit.
[Paras 35 to 42 and 45 (c) to (f)]  D. Constitution of India, Articles 233, 234 and 312 - Judicial Service/Judicial Officers/Employees - The judges are not employees, and judicial service is not service in the sense of employment.
As members of the judiciary, the judges exercise the sovereign judicial powers of the State and hold office in a manner similar to members of council of ministers and members of legislature.
Finally, the parity is between the political executive, the legislators, and the judges and not between the judges and the administrative executives.
[Paras 7 to 9]