Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970, Section 10 - Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, Section 10(1) - Workmen hired through a contractor as contract labour can request reference under Section 10(1) of the Industrial Disputes Act, provided that the demand for absorption with the principal employer is supported by the direct workmen of the principal employer.
The Labor Tribunal will determine whether the contract of labour is genuine or not.
If the contract of labour is found to be genuine, the Tribunal will initially refer the matter to the appropriate Government to abolish the contract, and if the contract is abolished, the Tribunal will be authorized to adjudicate the merits of the dispute and the status of the workmen for absorption with the principal employer.
If the contract of labour is deemed not genuine, the workmen will be considered the direct employees of the principal employer, and the reference of the dispute will be admissible without sending it to the appropriate Government for the abolition of contract labour.
However, only the appropriate government can eliminate contract labour, not the Labor Tribunals.
[Paras 50 and 75] B.
Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970, Section 10 - Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, Sections 2(s) and 10(1) - There is a significant gap in the Act, as there is no provision for determining the status of the workmen of the ex-contractor once the appropriate Government abolishes the contract labour.
Nonetheless, as both Acts have been enacted for the welfare of the workers, the provision is implicit in the statute, and the labor disputes referee has the authority to rule on their dispute in accordance with the provisions of the Act.
Procedures are outlined.
[Paras 42 to 44] C. Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970, Section 10 - Unfair Labour Practice/Public sector undertakings - If the workers can be hired directly, the provisions of the Act cannot be misused.
It is considered unfair labor practice for public sector undertakings to engage workers as contract labor rather than direct employment.
Recommendations have been made to abandon the contract labor system from the public sector.
The attitude adopted by the undertakings is contrary to the need to reduce unemployment, government policy, and the mandate of the directive principles.
Therefore, it is recommended that (a) all undertakings that employ contract labour in any operation or work that satisfies the criteria laid down in Section 10(2)(a) to (d) of the Act should abandon the contract labour and employ as many laborers as feasible as their direct employees.
(b) A governmental committee should be appointed by both the Central and State Governments to examine the establishments that engage contract labour and where the contract labour system can be eliminated, and direct employment can be provided to the contract labourers on the basis of the criteria laid down in clauses (a) to (d) of Section 10(2) of the Act.
The appropriate government should take the initiative to eliminate the labour contracts in the concerned establishments by following the procedure stipulated in the Act.
(c) The Central Government should amend the Act to add a suitable provision to refer to the industrial judge the issue of the direct employment of the workers of the ex-contractor in the principal establishment when the appropriate government abolishes the contract labour.
[Para 75]