According to the Constitution of India, under Article 124(4), no Bar Council or Bar Association has the right to pass a resolution against the conduct of a Judge perceived to have committed misbehaviour.
They are prohibited from discussing the conduct of a Judge or passing any resolution in that regard.
The only authority that could be consulted in the event of a reasonably and honestly doubtful Chief Justice of a High Court is the Chief Justice of India, who is known as the head of the judiciary.
To register a case and investigate the matter, the sanction and approval of the CJI is a prerequisite, and then the President will consult the Chief Justice of India before granting permission for the prosecution of the said Judge [Paras 10, 11, 14, 20, 27, 34, 40 to 42].
Every act or conduct by a higher judiciary, even an error of judgment, or negligent acts by a Judge, does not amount to misbehaviour.
Wilful abuse of judicial office, wilful misconduction in the office, lack of integrity, corruption, or any other offence involving moral turpitude would constitute misbehaviour.
Misconduct implies some degree of mens rea by the doer.
Misbehaviour refers to persistent failure by the Judge to perform his judicial duties or wilful abuse of his office dolus malus [Paras 24 to 26].
Preserving the rule of law and judicial independence is crucial for the guarantee of constitutional liberties, which would thrive only in an atmosphere of judicial independence.
The considered judgment of the Court guarantees these values [Paras 21 and 23].
According to Judicial propriety, a Judge's official and personal conduct must be free from impropriety and adhere to standards of propriety and probity.
The standards of conduct should be higher than expected of a layman and even an advocate.
Even his private life must adhere to high standards of probity and propriety, higher than those expected of ordinary citizens.
The Judge cannot hide behind the fallen standards in society [Paras 21 and 23].
High moral, ethical, and professional standards among the members of the Bar are prerequisites for maintaining high ethical standards on the Bench.
A Bar Council or a group of practising advocates are prohibited from discussing the conduct of a Judge in the discharge of his duties or passing any resolution in that regard [Para 27].
Misbehaviour/misconduct, literally, means wrong or improper conduct [Para 24].