Jurisdiction - Bar of jurisdiction of Civil Court - Principles explained.
In case a dispute arises from the general law of contract and relief is claimed based on the same, filing a suit in the civil court is not considered to be unmaintainable, even if the dispute is also an industrial dispute as per Section 2(k) or Section 2-A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
However, if the dispute involves the enforcement or recognition of any of the rights or obligations created by the Industrial Disputes Act, approaching the forums created by the said act is the only remedy.
Similarly, where a dispute arises concerning recognition, observance, or enforcement of rights and obligations created by the enactment like the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946, the employee must approach the forums created by Industrial Disputes Act, provided such disputes constitute industrial disputes as defined under Section 2(k) and Section 2-A of the Industrial Disputes Act or the enactment stating that such disputes shall be treated as Industrial disputes or adjudicated in any forum created by Industrial Disputes Act.
However, in case there is no provision to resolve such disputes, invoking legal action in the civil court is possible.
It is incorrect to assume that the remedies provided by the Industrial Disputes Act are less effective as the government has the power to make a reference, and the power to refer is guided and aimed at the object of the enactment.
The power is to refer and not to decide, although the government may examine if the dispute is frivolous and not meriting an adjudication.
To achieve the intent of the policy of law, it is suggested that the Parliament and the State Legislatures enable the workman to approach the Labour Court/Industrial Tribunal directly, without requiring a government reference, for industrial disputes covered by Section 2-A of the Industrial Disputes Act.
The certified Standing Orders framed under the Industrial Employment (Standings Orders) Act, 1946, are statutory conditions of service and bind the employer and employees.
Any violation of these orders permits the employee to seek appropriate relief from forums created by the Industrial Disputes Act or the civil court according to the principles mentioned in the text.
Industrial Disputes Act and its sister enactments aim to provide an alternative dispute resolution mechanism that is faster, cheaper, less formal, and not entangled in procedural laws and appeals that apply to civil courts.
The powers of Courts and Tribunals under the Industrial Disputes Act are more extensive, as they can provide the appropriate relief to resolve an industrial dispute.