Constitution of India, Article 311 - Departmental Enquiry/Enquiry Report - The Supreme Court has ruled that punishment cannot be awarded to the delinquent without supplying a copy of the enquiry report.
However, this decision only applies prospectively, and does not affect punishment orders passed before the ruling.
[Paras 6 and 7] B.
Constitution of India, Article 311 - Disciplinary proceedings - Promotion - Disciplinary proceedings will not be affected by promotion during their pendency.
[Para 8] C Constitution of India, Article 311 - Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947, Section 5(1)(e) - Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988, Section 13(1)(e) - Central Civil Services (Classification, Control, and Appeal) Rules, 1965 - Words and Phrases - To apply the provisions of the Prevention of Corruption Act and the Rules to say 'Criminal misconduct' under the Act, the charged officer must be a public servant and possess property disproportionate to his known income, which cannot be satisfactorily accounted for.
[Para 9] D. Constitution of India, Articles 21 and 311 - Disciplinary proceedings/Delay in initiating disciplinary proceedings - In cases of a charge against a government officer for possessing assets disproportionate to their known income, delay is not fatal as it is necessary to search for necessary material.
[Para 11] E. Constitution of India, Articles 226, 136, and 141 - Jurisdiction - Disciplinary action against an employee - The Court cannot act as the appellate authority to re-appreciate the evidence and arrive at its own independent findings on evidence.
The Court can only interfere when the proceedings have been inconsistent with the rules of natural justice or the statutory rules.
[Para 12] F. Constitution of India, Article 311 - Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947, Section 5(1)(e) - Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988, Section 13(1)(e) - Benefit of doubt - The Supreme Court has established the principle of deduction of 10% of the assets found in possession of a government officer guilty of possessing assets disproportionate to their known income.
This percentage is the maximum and cannot be raised.
[Para 16] G Constitution of India, Articles 141 and 226 - Jurisdiction/Quantum of punishment - The punishing authority has the exclusive power to impose an appropriate punishment in consideration of the magnitude or gravity of the misconduct.
The Court can only interfere if the punishment is found to be shockingly disproportionate in order to do complete justice.
[Paras 18, 19, and 25 of Part II]