The Constitution of India acknowledges the reservation in promotions for SC/ST Dalits under Articles 16(4) and 16(4-A), which is a balancing right to equality.
There should be proper representation for SC/ST Dalits in services, which is a fundamental right to the marginalized community.
They must be promoted by relaxation in competitive selection with general category candidates through a reservation of the quota of posts in each cadre.
Reserved points for SC/STs should not be considered against the general category, while SC/STs are entitled to compete against general category posts.
[Paras 26, 28, 38, 39, and 42]

The Supreme Court's postponement of the judgment of Indira Sawhney's (Mandal case) implementation for five years is a law of the land under Articles 16(4) and 142(1) read with Article 32 of the Constitution.
The postponement was to enable the legislature to remove the invalidity by making provision in the Constitution, which they did with the incorporation of Article 16(4-A).
Since the invalidity stands removed, the reservation in promotions is valid and constitutional.
Reserved category candidates given excess representation will be protected and not reverted.
[Paras 43, 57, 61, 62, and 63]

Discrimination via reservation is not a fundamental right.
However, article 16(1) and 16(14-A) provide guarantees a Statutory right to promotion to Dalits/Tribes.
The balance should be struck by applying the egalitarian protective discrimination in favour of the Dalits/Tribes.
Therefore, general category candidates are not entitled to be considered against the reserved points for SC/STs, but SC/STs are entitled to compete against general category posts.
Posts earmarked for Dalits/Tribes shall also be filled up and adjusted with them.
[Paras 43 and 44]

The judgment in Mandal's case is a majority opinion, and the rule of "Micro Lexicon Surgery" has failed.
Therefore, the prospective overruling of Rangachari's case by Jeevan Reddy, J is valid and should be applied.
[Para 45]

The rule of stare decisis should not be rigidly applied; rather, the constitutional command and social imperatives should be adhered to when considering this rule in a given situation.
The doctrine of stare decisis is flexible, and the Court may depart from it in circumstances involving public interest and constitutional construction.
[Paras 53 to 57]

While exercising the power of judicial review, the Court should balance the competing rights and may depart from an interpretation that retards progress or impedes social integration.
The power of judicial review should be exercised with insight into social values to supplement the changing social needs, stability, and progress of society.
[Paras 47 to 51]