The petitioner constables in the police department were deputed to CID and earned promotions on an ad hoc basis up to the rank of Sub-Inspectors.
Sought to be repatriated to their parent department as Head Constables, they petitioned for relief to quash the repatriation order and direct the respondents to absorb them in the CID where they put long years of service and to determine their seniority in the parent department by giving them the benefits of service and to promote them from the same date their juniors were promoted.
The High Court granted their relief and allowed the appeal.
However, the argument that the CID had a cadre of its own officers up to the rank of Sub-Inspector was rejected as officers of this rank are drawn from various districts in the State and CID has complete disciplinary control over all police officers serving in that department.
[Paras 7, 11, 13, 20, 21 and 22]

The argument presented that deputation to CID could not exceed a period of five years and the subsequent steps taken to send the petitioners back to their parent department after the expiry of this period and to ask them to appear in a test were irregular and arbitrary.
However, it was held that Sub-rule (1) of Rule 2125 does not limit deputation to CID for a maximum period of five years.
In the first instance, deputation is for three years, and it can be extended for not more than two years at a time.
This means that it cannot be said that after three years, extension is only allowed for a further two years.
[Para 11]

The petitioner constables in the police department who were deputed to the CID and had earned promotions on an ad hoc basis up to the rank of Sub-Inspectors were ordered to be repatriated to their parent department as Constables.
The High Court affirmed the option given to them to seek voluntary retirement after putting in 20 years of qualifying service.
This order was justified, and the order of the High Court was affirmed.
[Paras 21 and 22]

The concept of "deputation" and "repatriation" is well understood under service law, and "deputation" has a different connotation.
It means the service outside the cadre or outside the parent department.
Deputation involves deputing or transferring an employee to a post outside his cadre, to another department, on a temporary basis.
After the period of deputation is over, the employee has to come back to his parent department to occupy the same position, unless in the meanwhile, he has earned promotion in his parent department as per recruitment rules.
No deputation is allowed without the consent of the person so deputed, therefore, the employee knows his rights and privileges in a deputation post.
The law on deputation and repatriation is quite settled.
[Para 19]