The Constitution of India, Articles 124, 217, and 222(1) dictate the appointment process of Supreme Court and High Court Judges.
The expression "consultation with the Chief Justice of India" in Articles 217(1) and 222(1) requires the Chief Justice of India's opinion to be formed through consultation with a plurality of Judges.
This means that the Chief Justice's individual opinion cannot constitute "consultation" within the meaning of Articles 217(1) and 222(1).
For a recommendation to appoint a Supreme Court Judge, the Chief Justice of India must consult with the four senior-most puisne Judges of the Supreme Court, and for appointments to High Court Judges, the recommendation must be made in consultation with the two senior-most puisne Judges of the Supreme Court.
The Chief Justice of India is not entitled to act solely in his individual capacity, and consultation by Chief Justice of India does not exclude Judges who came to a High Court by transfer.
The views of the Judges consulted by the Chief Justice of India should be in writing and conveyed to the Government along with his opinion.
If the norms and process are not complied with, the President of India will be entitled to ignore the recommendations of Chief Justice of India and not appoint his recommendees.
The majority view in Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record Association v. UOI, AIR 1994 SC 268 upheld with a modification of increasing the size of the Collegium of puisne judges to be consulted from 2 to 4 for recommendations for appointment to Supreme Court.
If the majority of puisne Judges consulted disfavour an appointment, the President should not appoint them.
(Paras 14 to 20 and 39)

The Constitution of India, Articles 124 explain the appointment of Supreme Court Judges from High Court Judges.
While it is desirable to consider the seniority of High Court Judges, merit is the predominant consideration.
If there is outstanding merit, the possessor deserves to be appointed regardless of seniority across India.
If a Judge is superseded, he is still entitled to be considered in the next appointment according to seniority.
The prior appointment of the outstanding merit holder does not constitute any demerit for the Judge who was superseded.
(Paras 23, 24, 26, 27 and 39(6))

The Constitution of India, Articles 124(1), 217(1), 141, and 226 relate to judicial review and the scope of it for High Court Judges.
There is no bias in the process of appointment and transfer of Judges of High Court and Supreme Court since the judicial element is predominant due to the plurality of Judges in the formation of the Chief Justice of India's opinion.
Judicial review is only available at the instance of the Judge concerned only on the ground of non-consultation or non-consideration of opinion and recommendations made by the Judges required to be consulted.
Unless the decision to transfer has been made in the prescribed manner, it is not binding on the Government.
(Paras 28 to 36 and 39(2))