Maharashtra Recognition of Trade Unions & Prevention of Unfair Labour Practices Act, 1971, Sections 21(1)(i) and 25 - Notice of strike - Strike - If the requirements of a notice of strike are fulfilled in substance, it can be easily understood which section of the Act applies to the notice.
Not all formalities, including the specimen form in the Act and the order of typing the notice, are required for it to be considered valid.
[Para 12] B Strike - Notice of strike - The manner in which the notice of strike is delivered, whether by registered post or by hand, is not a fundamental requirement.
[Para 12] C. Maharashtra Recognition of Trade Unions & Prevention of Unfair Labour Practices Act, 1971, Sections 24(1)(b) and 25 - Strike - Union - Management cannot object to the union if it is recognised or not.
The labour court's findings that the union was not recognised were unnecessary and beyond the pleadings.
[Para 13] D Maharashtra Recognition of Trade Unions & Prevention of Unfair Labour Practices Act, 1971, Sections 24(1)(i), 25 and 26, Schedule IV, Item 9 - Strike - Unfair Labour Practices - Settlement - If the terms of a settlement cover a particular demand and it is not expressly excluded, the non-implementation of such settlement will be considered an unfair labour practice.
Strike notices issued for non-implementation of such terms cannot be held invalid and void U/s 24(1)(i) of the Act.
[Para 15] E Strike - Notice of strike - Validity - Alternative remedy - While it is advisable for workers to pursue other remedies that are less extreme to maintain industrial harmony and production, the mere fact that such remedies exist does not make strikes illegal unless they fall within the scope of matters covered by a settlement.
[Paras 15 and 16] F. Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, Section 3(8) - Bombay Industrial Relations Act, Section 3(1) - Definitions - Words and Phrases - "Covered" - Although the term "covered" has not been defined in the Act, its dictionary meaning should be used to interpret it.
[Para 16] G Constitution of India, Articles 226 and 227 - Scope of - Under Article 227 of the Constitution, the High Court cannot set aside the labour court's findings on the mere possibility of an alternative view unless the findings are patently bad or suffer from errors in law or jurisdiction.
[Para 18]