Constitution of India, Article 311 - Punjab Civil Services Rules, (as applicable to Haryana), Rule 3.26 - Compulsory retirement - A.C.R.
(Annual Confidential Report) - Compulsory retirement of Member of Superior Judicial Service on the basis of Annual Confidential Reports - One report related to year 1991-92 recorded by Inspecting Judge - Full Court of High Court on administrative side considered this reported in 1995 and graded as "C-Integrity doubtful" - Order of compulsory retirement set aside by High Court on Judicial Side - Order upheld by Supreme Court - Supreme Court observed that the report of 1991-92 which was considered by Full Court on administrative side had no basis - Other ACRs.
did not justify retirement.
[Paras 27 to 30]

Constitution of India, Article 311 - Punjab Civil Services Rules Vol.
I (as applicable to Haryana), Rules 3.26 - Compulsory retirement - Order of compulsory retirement passed by the High Court on Administrative Side, but then set aside by the High Court on Judicial Side - Order of High Court on Judicial Side upheld by Supreme Court - Held, order of compulsory retirement though innocuously worded in fact was an order of removal from service and cannot be sustained.
[Para 28]

Constitution of India, Article 325 - Inspection of subordinate courts - Inspection of subordinate courts is of vital importance, and it was meant to be both effective and productive - Inspection of subordinate courts cannot be just a one-day, or an hour, or a few minutes affair - It has to go all the year round by monitoring the work of courts by Inspecting Judge - Casual inspection can hardly be beneficial to the system and it does more harm than good.
[Para 30]

Constitution of India, Article 311 - Compulsory retirement - Law enunciated by the Supreme Court is summarized as follows:- (i) An order of compulsory retirement is not a punishment.
It implies no stigma nor any suggestion of misbehavior.
(ii) The order has to be passed by the government on forming the opinion that it is in the public interest to retire a government servant compulsorily.
The order is passed on the subjective satisfaction of the government.
(iii) Principles of natural justice have no place in the context of an order of compulsory retirement.
This does not mean that judicial scrutiny is excluded altogether.
While the High Court or this Court would not examine the matter as an appellate Court, they may interfere if they are satisfied that the order is passed (a) mala fide or (b) that it is based on no evidence or (c) that it is arbitrary - in the sense that no reasonable person would form the requisite opinion on the given material; in short, if it is found to be a perverse order.
(iv) The government (or the Review Committee, as the case may be) shall have to consider the entire record of service before taking a decision in the matter, of course attaching more importance to record of and performance during the later years.
The record to be so considered would naturally include the entries in the confidential records/character rolls, both favorable and adverse.
If a government servant is promoted to a higher post notwithstanding the adverse remarks, such remarks lose their sting, more so if the promotion is based upon merit (selection) and not upon seniority.
(v) An order of compulsory retirement is not liable to be quashed by a Court merely on the showing that while passing it uncommunicated adverse remarks were also taken into consideration.
That circumstance by itself cannot be a basis for interference.
Interference is permissible only on the grounds mentioned in (iii) above.
(vi) Even though the order of compulsory retirement is couched in innocuous language without making any imputations against the Government servant, the Court can lift the veil to find out whether the order is based on any misconduct of the Government servant or whether the order has been made bona fide and not with any oblique or extraneous purposes.
(vii) It cannot be said as a matter of law or rule that any and every order of compulsory retirement during the pendency of disciplinary proceedings is necessarily penal - It may or may not be - It is a matter to be decided on a verification of the relevant record or the material on which the order is based.
(viii) The High Court in its administrative jurisdiction has the power to recommend compulsory retirement of a member of the judicial service, but it cannot act arbitrarily, and there has to be material to come to a decision to compulsorily retire the officer.
[Paras 25, 27, and 24]