Constitution of India, Articles 14 and 311 - Criminal Proceedings - Departmental proceedings - In cases of simultaneous criminal and departmental proceedings, some principles can be followed as guidelines to balance the employee's right of defence with the need to conclude proceedings in a timely manner.
Departmental proceedings and proceedings in a criminal case can proceed simultaneously, but it may be desirable to stay the departmental proceedings if they are based on identical and similar facts as the criminal case, and if the charge in the criminal case is of a grave nature involving complicated questions of fact and law.
The factors mentioned cannot be considered in isolation to stay the departmental proceedings, but due regard must also be given to avoid undue delay.
If the criminal case does not proceed or its disposal is unduly delayed, the departmental proceedings can be resumed and concluded at an early date.
[Paras 12 to 21]

Constitution of India, Articles 14 and 311 - Criminal proceedings - Departmental proceedings - The standard of proof required in the criminal and departmental proceedings is different, with the criminal case requiring proof beyond reasonable doubts and the departmental proceedings requiring a preponderance of probabilities.
Their purpose is also different.
[Para 12]

Constitution of India, Articles 14 and 21 - Central Civil Service (Classification, Control & Appeal) Rules, Rule 10 - Fundamental Rules, Rule 53 - Suspension - Subsistence allowance - During suspension, the employer has an unqualified right to suspend the employee, with subsistence allowance paid at a reduced rate than salary for the employee's sustenance.
If there is no rule for payment of such allowance at a reduced rate, the employer is liable to pay full salary during suspension.
Non-payment of subsistence allowance violates principles of natural justice and prejudices the defence of the delinquent, vitiating the entire proceedings and punishment order.
[Paras 24 to 30]

Constitution of India, Articles 14 and 311 - Disciplinary proceedings - Natural justice - If an adjournment is sought on account of the delinquent's illness, duly supported by medical certificates during enquiry proceedings, it should be granted.
Refusing it and disbelieving the delinquent results in ex-parte proceedings and punishment, in total violation of the principles of natural justice.
[Para 30]

Constitution of India, Articles 14 and 311 - Criminal and Departmental proceedings - Witnesses - Evidence - Charges based on the allegations of search conducted on the residence of the delinquent and recovery made - Enquiry officer examined the same persons who were made witnesses in criminal case on the same cause and held the charges proved - Criminal case dismissed holding that no search was conducted nor any of the witness were present - The Departmental proceedings and punishment had no legs to stand to apply the standard of proof - Punishment order held vitiated.
[Paras 31 and 32]