Constitutional Article 235 states the control that High Courts have over subordinate courts.
Under this article, the Chief Justice can appoint a Committee of Judges to act as the Disciplinary Committee.
The term "High Court" used in Article 235 may refer to either the entire body of judges in the High Court or solely the Administrative Committee formed under the rules developed by the High Court.
The Constitution Bench decision in State of Uttar Pradesh v. Batuk Deo Pati Tripathi established that the Administrative Committee is authorized to recommend imposing a major penalty, which cannot be challenged on the basis that such recommendations were not made by the High Court.
If the Constitution has bestowed power to the High Court, then it is also within the power of the High Court to determine the manner in which this power is exercised.
Thus, the recommendations made by the Disciplinary Committee are authoritative and cannot be disputed regarding dismissing an individual.
[Paras 16, 17 and 20]

Forming a small committee of a few senior judges in the Disciplinary Committee of the High Court precludes the possibility for other judges to have a permanent position within the Committee.
This exclusion contradicts the concept of wider consultation expressed in the term "High Court" as used under Article 235 of the Constitution.
[Para 21]

Maharashtra Civil Services (Discipline and Appeal) Rules, 1979 Rule 9(2) requires the punishing authority to issue a show-cause notice to an employee if they do not agree with the findings of the Inquiry Officer, which exonerate the accused.
The authority must provide the delinquent with the reasons for their disagreement, giving them the opportunity to present their perspective to confirm the accuracy of the Inquiry Officer's findings.
Even if certain disciplinary rules do not state this obligation in writing, the principles of natural justice require such show-cause notice to be issued.
[Paras 27, 28 and 31]

For as long as the disciplinary/punishing authority has not made a final decision in the matter, the enquiry is still considered as pending.
The mere submission of findings by the Inquiring Authority does not end the process.
[Paras 31 and 36]

Article 311(2) of the Constitution requires the Punishing Authority to indicate a tentative decision proposing a punishment in the show-cause notice, not the final decision.
Making the final decision while issuing a show-cause violates the principles of natural justice and results in the nullification of the proceedings.
[Paras 34, 37 & 38]

The High Court is constitutionally obligated to safeguard honest judicial officers by dismissing unscrupulous complaints made by lawyers and litigants while exercising its power of control over the subordinate judiciary under the provisions of Article 235.
[Para 49]

The findings of fact can always be reconsidered, and evidence can be reappraised if the findings are considered to be erroneous or not supported by the evidence presented by the High Court or the Supreme Court.
[Paras 51 and 52]