Constitution of India, Articles 14 and 16 (4) - Reservation - Creamy layer - Reservation cannot be based solely on caste and must include only socially and economically backward citizens - Those who fall under the creamy layer must be excluded from the benefits of reservation so that it can be given to those who are truly backward - The idea of "once backward, always backward" is not acceptable - Those who have achieved sufficient means due to their affluence must also be excluded from the backward class from time to time through reasonable revisions set by the government.
[Paras 8, 9, 10, 21 and 23] B.
Constitution of India, Articles 14 and 16(4) - Reservation - Creamy layer - The creamy layer in the backward caste should be treated the same as the forward classes - If the creamy layer is not excluded, then discrimination and violation of Articles 14 and 16(1) will occur - Equals cannot be treated unequally.
[Para 26] C. Constitution of India, Articles 309, 14 and 16 - Legislation against judicial pronouncement - If any legislative or administrative action is declared violative of Part III of the Constitution, the executive or legislature can remove the defect prospectively or retrospectively - However, no validation can occur without removing the defect, as it would overrule the judgment of the court and go against the doctrine of separation of powers.
[Paras 26 and 27] D. Constitution of India, Articles 14 and 16(4) - Kerala State Backward Classes (Reservation of Appointments or Posts in the Services under the State) Act, 1995, Sections 3, 4 and 6 - Reservation - Creamy layer - The provisions in Sections 3 to 6 of the Kerala Reservation Act, 1955 are in derogation to the directions of the Supreme Court made in Indira Sawhney's case as they provide that no sections of any backward class have acquired the capacity to compete with forward classes - The Kerala Legislature allowed the creamy layer to continue to receive the benefits of reservation meant for backward classes through different means - As such, these sections are unconstitutional.
[Para 29] ii.
The declaration in sub-clause (a) of Section 3 of the Kerala 1995 Act has no factual basis, and the declaration is unrelated to the facts in existence - It is therefore unconstitutional as per the principles laid down in Indira Sawhney and Ashok Kumar Thakur's cases.
[Paras 41, 52 and 53] iii.
Section 4 of the Kerala Act, 1995 provides for the continuance of reservation for the backward classes while ignoring the directive of the Supreme Court made in Indira Sawhney's case for the exclusion of creamy layer - The non-obstante clause in Section 4 cannot override judgments of the court based on Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution - Neither Parliament nor the State Legislature can make any laws to continue reservation to the creamy layer that is contrary to the judgments of the Supreme Court or override the provisions of Articles 14 and 16(1) - Section 4 of the Kerala Act is declared unconstitutional.
[Paras 55, 57 and 58] iv.
Once Sections 3 and 4 of Kerala Act, 1995 are declared unconstitutional, Section 6 cannot stand alone - Section 6 is also unconstitutional.
[Paras 59 and 60] v. The Kerala State knowingly violated the Rule of law and Constitution to pass on the buck to the courts and blame them for striking down the unconstitutional provisions of the same.
[Paras 84 and 86] E. Constitution of India, Articles 141, 32 and 226 - Legislative declaration - The factual basis of legislation is not beyond judicial scrutiny - The court can lift the veil and examine the facts to hold a legislative declaration invalid - Section 3 of the Kerala Reservation Act, 1995 holds invalid as it is based on non-existent facts.
[Paras 32 to 34] F. Constitution of India, Articles 14 and 16 - Kerala State Backward Classes (Reservation of Appointments or Posts in the Services under the State) Act, 1995, Sections 3, 4 and 6 - Creamy layer - Reservation - The Kerala legislature could not deny the existence of horizontal divisions among the backward classes in Kerala - Those who achieve the prescribed higher levels of income, their children will have to be treated in the creamy layer - The state could not state that no one from such classes will ever reach these economic levels in future too - If a large portion of the creamy layer in a class has reached a very high percentage, the backward class concerned may itself have to be denotified - Exclusion of the creamy layer cannot be ignored on the ground that the remaining backward class in the minority will not be able to secure adequate representation of a reserved quota.
[Paras 38, 39, 46 and 47] G. Constitution of India, Articles 16(4) and 335 - Reservation - Administrative efficiency - There is no specific provision in relation to the need for maintenance of efficiency of administration for the purpose of Article 16(4) like the special provision in Article 335 - But the same provision will prevail as the principle of efficiency of administration is impliedly in Articles 14 and 16 - Therefore, the qualifications, standards and talent necessary for Backward Classes cannot be relaxed or reduced to a level which may affect the efficiency of administration.
[Paras 48] H. Constitution of India, Articles 14 and 16 - Equality - Articles 14 and 16 is a part of the basic structure of the Constitution based on equality, a basic feature referred to in the preamble to our Constitution - All constitutional amendments that offend the basic structure of the Constitution would be ultra vires its basic structure - The State legislature is least competent to make an enactment contrary to Articles 14 or 16 of the Constitution or the judgments based thereon.
[Paras 61 and 62] I.
Constitution of India, Articles 14 and 16(4) - Creamy layer - The guidelines and criteria fixed by the Justice Joseph Committee are reasonable, so far as the State of Kerala is concerned.
[Paras 73 and 76] J. Constitution of India, Articles 14, 16 and 141 - Kerala State Backward Classes (Reservation of Appointments or posts in the Services under the State) Act, 1995, Sections 3, 4 and 6 - Legislation contrary to declaration of Supreme Court and Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution - Sections 3, 4 and 6 of Kerala Reservation Act, 1995 are in willful and deliberate violation of the directives of the Supreme Court made in Indira Sawhney and Ashok Kumar Thakur's cases as also Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution - The Act is clearly a contemptuous one - However, the action in suo motu contempt postponed adopting the principle of prospective overruling of contemptuous provisions of the Act to give one more opportunity to the State of Kerala to give effect to the judicial declaration - Appointments made during interregnum from the creamy layer not to be disturbed - Kerala State directed to follow the norms of Justice Joseph's Committee and also to include the pointed out communities in the backward classes and implement the directions within three months failing which action in suo motu contempt to be taken.
[Paras 78, 79, 82 to 86]