J & K Civil Service (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1956, Rule 5 - Rule Relaxation - In terms of J&K Civil Service Rules, 1956, Rule 5, relaxation of rules can be granted in both individual and group cases.
[Para 22]

Constitution of India, Articles 14 and 16 - Regularisation - Failure to comply with recruitment rules - Non-regularisation of ad-hoc/temporary employees for an extended period of time contravenes Articles 14 and 16.
While there is no implied relaxation of rules, relaxation can be given if there are cogent reasons recorded.
In cases of wholesale regularisation for ad-hoc/temporary employees without following the procedure prescribed by the rules, the order can be quashed as it infringes on the reservation policy and quota rule.
[Paras 23 and 27 to 29]

Constitution of India, Articles 14 and 16(4) - Quota Rules - Quota for Direct Recruitment and Promotions - non-compliance with quota rule - The quota rule cannot be considered violated just because the government or authorities have made no attempts to fill up the posts in accordance with the quota rule.
It is only when the candidates are not available from the relevant source of appointment/promotion for an extended period that the quota rule can be considered violated.
[Paras 31 to 35]

Constitution of India, Articles 14 and 16(4) - Roster - Unless specifically provided, rota rule cannot be presumed just because it was practiced in the past.
[Paras 36 to 40]

J & K Civil Service (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1956, Rules 4, 14 and 23 - Retroactive Regularization - Adhoc/stop-gap arrangement - The period when a person held a post as a stop-gap arrangement can be included in the period of service during the probation period for retroactive regularization.
[Paras 48, 52 and 53]

J & K Civil Service (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1956, Rule 24 - Seniority - Provisional seniority - A promoted employee's seniority is established based on their probation commencement date in a clear vacancy in the promotion quota.
[Para 49]

J&K Civil Services (CCA) Rules, 1956, Rule 23 - J&K Public Service Commission (Limitation of Functions) Regulations, 1957, Regulation 4(D)(ii) - Regularisation of Officiating Promotion - Appointment Eligibility - If the appointment does not adhere to the rules, it can still be regularized under Rule 23.
However, orders of regularization cannot be passed in violation of the eligibility criteria without considering the service records and eligibility that are required to be examined by the Public Service or DPC.
[Paras 54 to 58 and 64]

Constitution of India, Articles 14 and 16 - Regularisation - Appointment in accordance with rules - The principle that only service rendered according to the rules can be regularized applies to direct recruits and not to promotees.
If an ad-hoc service is rendered before the regular promotion on an existing post, it will count from the date of actual promotion on existence of post in promotion quota.
But if ad-hoc promotion was either outside quota or not meeting eligibility criteria, then period of ad-hoc promotion will not be counted.
[Paras 69 to 74]

Constitution of India, Article 14 and Article 16 - Seniority - Direct Recruit - Adhoc appointment before selection - Direct recruits cannot claim appointment from the date of the vacancy in the quota before their selection.
[Paras 75 to 77]