Delhi Higher Judicial Service Rules, 1970 (as stood prior to amendment of 1987), Rules 7, 8, 16 and 17 - Constitution of India, Articles 16 and 14 - Ad hoc appointment - To determine inter-se seniority of promotees and direct recruits who are appointed to Delhi Higher Judicial Service, their continuous service in Higher Judicial Service must be taken into account - Officers already promoted on ad hoc and stop-gap measure with approved qualifications are not considered ad hoc or stop-gap appointments.
Singla's case, 1985(1) SCR 351 explained - Seniority list prepared by High Court which did not abide by Singla's case is quashed.
[Paras 11 to 15 and 20]

Constitution of India, Article 16 - Fortuitous appointment - The term `fortuitous' implies an appointment made accidentally because of a specific situation for a short-term period.
[Para 16]

Constitution of India, Articles 309, 16 - Interpretation of statute - Service Rules - When terms such as `ad hoc', `stop-gap' and `fortuitous' are not defined in service rules, their meanings must be inferred from dictionary definitions.
The meaning of word `ad hoc' is explained.
[Paras 16 to 18]

Constitution of India, Article 16 - Ad hoc appointment and fortuitous appointment - If the appointment order indicates that a post is created to meet a specific, temporary contingency for a fixed period, then the appointment is classified as `ad hoc' or `stop-gap'.
If a post is created to manage a situation of temporary nature, then appointment to such a post will be known as `fortuitous' in nature.
[Para 9]

Constitution of India, Article 16 - Stop-gap, fortuitous and ad hoc appointment - If an appointed person possesses mandated qualifications for a specific post and is approved by the appropriate authorities and continues in the post for a long-term period, then such an appointment cannot be considered stop-gap, fortuitous, or purely ad hoc.
[Para 20]

Delhi Higher Judicial Service Rules, 1970, Rules 8(2), 16 and 7 - Quota rule - Under the service rules, 30% direct recruitment and 70% promotion is established.
However, the quota rule has broken down, and seniority must be determined based on continuous length of service rather than quota and rota.
The promotees who have been promoted after due consultation with and approval of High Court under Rule 16 or 17 and who possess requisite qualifications for promotion under Rule 7 are eligible.
Singla's case, 1985(1) SCR 351 explained.
[Para 11]