The jurisdiction to exercise the power of termination under Section 19 read with Rule 14 of Army Rules is not taken away by the expiry of the period of limitation under Section 122 of the Army Act.
However, a belated decision to invoke Section 19 can be said to be vitiated for colourable or mala fide exercise of power if the delay is on the part of the authorities attracting Section 122.
The decision in Major Radha Krishan's case is overruled.
[Paras 28, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, and 40]

The power under Section 19 read with Rule 14 of Army Rules can be invoked if dispensing with an enquiry is "impracticable", "impossible", "not feasible" or "not reasonably practicable".
This power is independent, and Sections 19 and 45 of the Army Act are mutually exclusive.
The power under Section 19 read with Rule 14 can be invoked at any stage of even Court Martial proceedings till pronouncement and confirmation thereof, taking into consideration prevailing facts and circumstances.
Once the findings of the General Court Martial (GCM) are confirmed, it is not permissible to exercise this power again.
It cannot be accepted that Section 19 and Rule 14 cannot be invoked once the Court Martial is ordered or constituted.
The phrases "impracticable", "impossible", "not feasible" or "not reasonably practicable" are clearly explained.
[Paras 22, 24, 27, 28, 29, and 40]

Enquiry cannot be dispensed with lightly or arbitrarily or out of ulterior motive or merely to avoid holding of enquiry or on account of weaknesses in the case.
However, it is not necessary that reasons for dispensing with an enquiry must exist before initiation of enquiry.
The situation can arise subsequently at any stage, and it is a matter of assessment and satisfaction of the disciplinary authority, which is not immune from judicial review.
Nonetheless, judicial review is not available only because two views were possible on the satisfaction reached by the authority.
[Paras 31, 32, and 39]

When a word is not defined in the Act itself, it is permissible to refer to dictionaries to find out the general sense in which that word is understood in common parlance.
However, in selecting one out of the various meanings of a word, regard must always be had to the context.
The meanings of words and expressions used in an Act must take colour from the context in which they appear.
[Paras 28 and 29]