The rules of the Delhi Higher Judicial Services dictate that temporary posts created prior to the amendment in the rules must be filled in accordance with the un-amended rules.
However, this does not apply where the positions have to be filled under the amended rules.
In the Delhi Higher Judicial Service, there is no requirement of preparing a list of candidates eligible for promotion by any particular date.
The appointing authority is not obliged to fill the posts under Rule 16 immediately.
The High Court must begin the process of selection by direct recruitment in accordance with draft rules and fill temporary posts if it has not started the process, even if advertisement has not been issued before the amendment of rules.
The expression "Initial Recruitment" means the first recruitment and appointment made to the service after the commencement of rules.
[Para]

The quota rule in the Delhi Higher Judicial Services stipulates that 1/3rd of the vacancies at a given point of time must be allotted to direct recruitment from the Bar.
However, it should not exceed 1/3rd of the total number of posts in the service.
At the time when the relevant advertisement was issued for direct recruits, the total number of posts in the service were 53; 39 permanent and 14 temporary.
The posts held by direct recruits were only 8.
The advertisement issued for the recruitment of direct recruits for 10 posts wouldn't infract the proviso to Rule 7(b).
[Para 6]

The quota rule in the Delhi Higher Judicial Services allows the allotment of 1/3rd of the vacancies at a given point of time to direct recruitment from the Bar, but not exceeding 1/3rd of the total number of posts in the service.
Although Article 233 provides for the appointment of District Judges, and Clause (1) specifies that the appointment could be made by the Governor in consultation with the High Court, Clause (2) involves the appointment of a person not currently in the service of the Union or State as District Judge, who is an advocate for not less than seven years ie from members of the Bar.
The rule cannot be considered to violate Articles 14, 16 and 233 as it allows for filling the posts by both promotion and direct recruitment, with the provision that the direct recruits cannot be more than 1/3rd of the total number of posts.
This line of reasoning is based on AIR 1991 SC 382.
[Para 7]