The Punjab Civil Services Rules state that J.B.T.
teachers who are promoted to Head teachers must receive one increment of higher responsibility.
[Para 2]
The concept of reservation is guided by the consideration of allotting a privilege to a defined class in need of protection.
This is necessary as there are underprivileged classes who cannot be treated on par with more privileged classes.
There can be different sources of recruitment to achieve intermingling between two or more categories of such persons.
No one can be said to be weaker than the other.
Reservation is protective discrimination, while sources of entry aim at securing equal or proportionate distribution.
The emphasis in reservation is on the subjects, while the emphasis in providing sources of entry is on the subject matter.
Reservation must be within reasonable limits, and there should be no reservation in postgraduate courses based on institutional preference.
This is because institutional reservation does not have the sanction of Article 14 or 15, and meritorious cannot be ignored under the garb of reservation or institutional preference.
[Paras 26-29]
While seeking admission to higher levels of study, the principle of institutional continuity must be minimized and not be at the cost of excellence and merit.
A special provision should be less than 50% depending upon relevant circumstances in each case.
There should be no reservation in postgraduate courses based on institutional preference, and institutional reservation does not have sanction of Article 14 or 15.
Any preference other than in order of merit will not stand the test of Article 14.
[Paras 30, 31, 33-37, 44, 52, 55-57]
Protective discrimination is justified, subject to discharging the burden of proving justification in favour of the class, which must be educationally handicapped.
The higher the level of the specialty, the lesser the role of reservation.
[Para 52]
Delhi University is in no sense an educationally or commercially backward human region, measured against the rest of our country.
The residents of Delhi or those who can afford admission to AIIMS cannot be provided reservation on considerations of educational and economic backwardness.
[Para 40]
Reservation, unless protected by the Constitution itself, is subversion of fraternity, unity and integrity and dignity of the individual.
Reservation is an inroad on the right of others to work and to learn.
[Para 52]
Under Article 47, public health can be improved by having the best of doctors, specialists and super-specialists.
Reservations beyond the undergraduate level are a reversion or diversion from the performance of primary duty of the State.
[Para 52]
Once reservations are made at the lowest or primary rung, they must be withdrawn in the interests of protectees so that they develop strength and feel confident of stepping on higher rungs on their own legs shedding the crutches.
Pushing protection of reservation beyond the primary level betrays the desire to keep the crippled crippled forever.
[Para 52]
Any reservation apart from being sustainable on the constitutional anvil must also be reasonable to be permissible.
Excellence cannot be given an unreasonable go by and certainly not compromised in its entirety.
Mediocracy over meritocracy cuts at the roots of justice and hurts the right to equality.
Protective push or prop, by way of reservation or classification must withstand the test of Article 14.
To deprive a man of merit of his due, even marginally, no rule shall sustain except by the aid of Constitution.
[Para 52-53]