Article 233 of the Constitution of India and UP Higher Judicial Service Rules provide rules for the recruitment and appointment of District Judges.
The Governor, in consultation with the High Court, determines the strength of the service and appoints new officers from three sources as per Rules 6 and 8.
Reservation for SC/BC must be made in accordance with government orders.
Rule 8 obligates the Court to determine the number of officers to be taken at recruitment, considering existing and upcoming vacancies.
A list of selected candidates in order of merit is prepared by the Court and forwarded to the Governor for appointment as per Rule 22.
[Paras 15, 21, 22, 23, 33 and 34]

Article 233 and UP Higher Judicial Service Rules provide rules for the promotion of Nyayik Sewa officers.
Selection is based on seniority-cum-merit from a field of eligibility up to four times the number of vacancies to be filled by promotion.
A selection committee prepares a preliminary list of officers who are found fit to be appointed.
The Full Court then considers the list to prepare the final order of seniority of candidates forwarded to the Governor as per Rule 20(5), which remains operative until the next recruitment.
There is no such provision for direct recruits under Rule 18.
[Para 16]

UP Higher Judicial Service Rules include a temporary appointment provision under Rule 22(3) for District Judges when regular appointments cannot be made from the three sources.
These appointments are not substantive and do not confer seniority in the cadre.
[Paras 6 and 18]

Waiting lists are governed by Rule 20(5) and Rule 8(1) of the UP Higher Judicial Service Rules, and appointments from waiting lists operate until the next recruitment.
Once the recruitment process has commenced, any previously existing waiting list ceases to operate, and further appointments cannot be made.
Wait-listed candidates do not have a vested right to be appointed except under specific circumstances.
[Paras 17, 31 and 35]

Article 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India provide for reservation and classification of cadres and posts.
The use of a roster system, such as the 100 point roster, determines how vacancies are filled based on category.
Once the full roster is operated upon, subsequent vacancies are filled from the category to which the post belongs in the roster.
[Para 36]