Constitution of India, Articles 233(2) and 234 - The recruitment of those who are not District Judges to the Judicial Service - Fresh law graduates with less than three years of practice are eligible to compete and enter the judicial service - Fresh recruits should receive at least one year of training, preferably two - The recommendations of the Shetty Commission were accepted - State governments must amend their rules.
Held, The High Courts and state governments must amend their rules so that a fresh law graduate with less than three years of practice may compete and enter the judicial service.
However, a fresh recruit must receive at least one year of training, preferably two.
[Para 31]

Constitution of India, Articles 233 and 234 - Subordinate Judiciary - Assured Career Progressive Scheme - Judicial Officers should not feel stagnant - The nomenclature should change with the change of pay scale - The nomenclature should differ for each scale.
Held, What is important is that the nomenclature should differ for each scale.
A judicial officer will feel that he has made progress in his judicial career as he moves upward within the service with his nomenclature or designation changing.
[Para 33]

Constitution of India, Articles 233 and 234 - Allowances for members of subordinate Judiciary - Electricity and water charges - 50% of the electricity and water charges should be borne by the State Government.
Held, 50% of electricity and water charges should be borne by the State Government.
[Para 33]

Constitution of India, Articles 233 and 234 - Subordinate Judiciary - Official accommodations allotted to Judicial Officers should be free of charge - No House Rent Allowance will be payable.
Recommendations of Shetty Commission partly accepted.
Held, The allotted official accommodation should be free of charge, but no house rent allowance will be payable.
If the government is unable to allot the accommodation, the judicial officer would be entitled to receive a house rent allowance that is similar to the existing allowance or the one directed by the Shetty Commission, whichever is higher.
[Para 34]

Constitution of India, Articles 234 - Criminal Procedure Code, 1973, Sections 12 and 17 - Constitution of Criminal Courts and Office - Posts of Chief Judicial Magistrate and Chief Metropolitan Magistrate should be equated.
Held, Considering the nature and duties of the Chief Judicial Magistrates and the Chief Metropolitan magistrates, the posts of Chief Judicial Magistrate and Chief Metropolitan Magistrate should be equated and placed in the cadre of Civil Judge (Senior Division).
[Para 30]

Constitution of India, Articles 233 and 233(2) - Recruitment to the Higher Judicial Services i.e. the Cadre of District Judges - Determination of Seniority - Principle of roster system approved - Roster system must be evolved in the future to protect the relative seniority of the members of the higher judicial service - 50% by promotion from amongst Senior Civil Judge on the principle of merit-cum-seniority - 25% by promotion strictly on the basis of merit and 25% to be filled up by direct recruitment - Appropriate rules must be framed.
Held, (a) 50 per cent of the posts should be filled by promotion from amongst the civil judges (senior division) on the basis of the principle of merit-cum-seniority and passing a suitability test;  (b) 25 per cent of the posts should be filled by promotion strictly on the basis of merit through limited competitive examination of civil judges (senior division) with not less than five years of qualifying service; and  (c) 25 per cent of the posts should be filled by direct recruitment from eligible advocates on the basis of the written and viva voce test conducted by the respective High Courts.
Appropriate rules must be framed as above by the High Courts as early as possible.
[Paras 26, 27, and 28]

Constitution of India, Articles 233 and 234 - Subordinate Courts - Pay scale and service conditions of members of Subordinate Judicial Service - Justice Shetty Commission's recommendations - Question of parity with the members of IAS - State Government reluctant to accept recommendations due to financial constraints - Whether the commission justified in recommending that 5% of the expenses be borne by the Central Government - No. Are the recommendations of the Commission reasonable, just, and fair?
Held, The recommendations made by the Shetty Commission are reasonable, just, and fair.
The pay scales recommended by the Shetty Commission are just and reasonable.
The parity in the scales of pay for judicial officers with the scales of pay of IAS officers is not, by and large, disturbed.
The entire expenditure on account of the recommendations of the Justice Shetty Commission, as accepted, must be borne by the respective states.
It is for the states to increase the court fee or to approach the finance commission or the Union of India for more allocation of funds.
[Paras 19 and 22]

Constitution of India, Articles 233 and 234 - Subordinate Courts - Filling of backlog vacancies - Increase in the strength of Judges from the existing ratio to 50 Judges per 10 lakh people - Posts to be filled up within a period of five years from today - Re-employment of the retiring Judicial Officers until the age of 62 years - Can be made to fill up the backlog - High Court to amend the service rules and to provide re-employment.
Held, The existing vacancies in the subordinate courts at all levels must be filled, if possible, by March 31st, 2003, in all the states.
The increase in the judge strength to 50 judges per 10 lakh people should be effected with the filling up of the posts in a phased manner to be determined and directed by the Union Ministry of Law, but the total process must be completed and the increased vacancies and posts filled within a period of five years from today.
The difference is appropriate and must be maintained.
However, due to the backlog of vacancies that must be filled, it would be appropriate for the states to amend the service rules in consultation with the High Court and to provide for the re-employment of retiring judicial officers until the age of 62 years if there are vacancies in the cadre of the district judge.
[Paras 24 and 25]