The Indian Constitution states in Article 32 that the Supreme Court can be approached for enforcement of Fundamental Rights conferred by Part III of the Constitution.
The Court can issue any Directions, Orders or Writs including Writs in nature of Habeas Corpus, Mandamus, Prohibition, Quo Warranto, and Certiorari for enforcement of Fundamental Right under Article 32 of the Constitution.
[Para 5]

The Indian Constitution in Articles 32 and 226 indicates that a High Court cannot issue a writ to another High Court.
Also, one Bench of a High Court cannot issue a writ to another Bench.
Neither a High Court nor the Supreme Court can issue a writ to each other under Article 32.
The Supreme Court will not issue a writ to a High Court in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 32.
A smaller or larger Bench of the Supreme Court cannot issue a writ to the Constitutional Bench of Supreme Court.
The High Court is also not considered an inferior court or authority to the Supreme Court.
Superior Courts of Justice are not classified as a State within the meaning of Article 12.
[Para 6 & 7]

The Indian Constitution states in Article 32 that neither a party nor any aggrieved person can challenge a Final Order or Judgment of the Supreme Court even if they were not a party to that particular Order or Judgment.
[Paras 14 & 61]

The Indian Constitution in Articles 137 and 142, the Supreme Court Rules, and Order XL Rule 5 establish Stare Decisis and Law of Precedents, notions of Inherent Powers, Curative Petition, and the permissibility of Supreme Court correcting its own earlier order under its inherent powers after dismissal of Review Petition.
While Order XL Rule 5 bars any further applications for review in the same matter, however, the Supreme Court can review its own Judgement under Article 137.
The Court can lay down the law formulating principles and guidelines to adjust to changing conditions of society.
Duty to do justice in the rarest of rare cases must have to prevail over policy of certainty of judgment.
Earlier judgment or order can be reconsidered only on the grounds that it is vitiated due to violations of the principle of natural justice or apprehension of bias of a Judge who participated in decision making process due to their links to the party involved or by abuse of the process of the court.
The Supreme Court can reconsider its own Judgment or Order even after dismissal of Review Petition under inherent powers in order to prevent abuse of its process, to cure miscarriage of justice.
Grounds for entertaining Curative Petition to invoke inherent powers can be the violation of principles of natural justice or the basis of a Judge with the subject matter or the parties giving scope for an apprehension of biased judgment adversely affecting the petitioner.
[Paras 42, 49, 50 & 51]

The Indian Constitution under Article 137 states that the Procedure of filing for a Curative Petition mandates that it shall specifically state that the grounds mentioned therein had been taken in the Review Petition and that it was dismissed in circulation.
It must be certified by a Senior Advocate that the above condition is fulfilled.
It should be first circulated to a Bench of three senior-most Judges and the Senior-most Judges who passed the impugned Judgment, if available.
It is to be listed only if a majority of Judges conclude that the matter needs a hearing.
[Paras 52 and 53]

In the context of the Indian Constitution, a Curative Petition is a Petition filed to reconsider an earlier Judgment by the Supreme Court even after dismissal of a Review Petition.
[Paras 50, 52, 53]