Cr.PC Section 24 states that appointment of Public Prosecutors is governed by Cr.PC and is a tenure post, hence Service Rules framed under Article 309 of the Constitution are not applicable to them.
Public Prosecutors retain the character of legal practitioners for all intent and purport.
[Paras 39, 40, 43 and 44]

Public Prosecutor holds a tenure post with no enforceable right of renewal of tenure - Government has the discretion to renew - Action of the Govt. in not renewing the tenure may be subject to judicial scrutiny, inter alia, on the ground that the same is arbitrary.
[Paras 40 and 46]

Constitution of India, Article 226 - Discretionary powers of State are not beyond the pale of judicial review.
[Para 41]

Assistant Public Prosecutors are employees of the State and as they hold civil posts, their appointment is governed by the service rules framed by the respective State government.
However, Public Prosecutors do not hold a civil post.
[Paras 37, 38 and 39]

The Legal Remembrancer Manual (UP Govt.) contains only executive instructions and hence, it is not law within the meaning of Article 13 of Constitution of India.
[Para 42]

Public Prosecutors and District Govt.
Counsel hold offices of great importance as they are not only officers of the court but also the representative of the State.
Their opinion in a matter carries great weight.
They are supposed to render independent, fearless and non-partisan views before the court irrespective of the result of litigation which may ensue.
[Paras 71, 72 and 73]

The change in the government does not mean that the existing panel of the District Government Counsel may be disturbed and a fresh panel come into being.
[Para 78]

Judicial review of administrative orders is limited to seeing that the tribunal functions within the limits of its authority and that its decisions do not occasion miscarriage of justice.
The Courts cannot be called upon to undertake the government duties and functions.
[Paras 28 and 30]

For a public law remedy enforceable under Article 226 of the Constitution, the actions of the authority need to fall in realm of public law be it a legislative act of the State, an executive act of the State or an instrumentality or a person or authority imbued with public law element.
[Paras 24 and 28]

District Govt.
Counsel holds a tenure post with no enforceable right of renewal of tenure, and the State may be challenged if action was arbitrary.
[Para 40 and 46]

The amendment made in Section 24 of Cr.PC by UP State deleting the consultation with High Court in the matter of appointment of Public Prosecutors has no rationale behind it.
Despite deletion, the State Govt. shall consult High Court to ensure fairness.
[Paras 86 and 87]

The direction of High Court to constitute a collegium is invalid, as High Court has no jurisdiction to direct formulation of a new legal principle or a new procedure which would be contrary to and inconsistent with a statutory provision like Code of Criminal Procedure.
[Paras 52, 55, 56 and 57]