Constitution of India, Articles 29(2), 30(1) & 19(1)(g) - An un-aided and unrecognized, minority aided and educational institution has freedom and control over admissions, administration and fee regulation with very few restrictions aimed at protecting public safety, national security and preventing exploitation of students or teachers and activities which are violative of any law of the land.
Minority unaided, institutions affiliated or recognized cannot be denied recognition or affiliation merely because they want to run only a minority institution.
Conditions can only be imposed on aided Minority institutions for proper utilization of grants.
A proper legislation is needed to prevent misuse of NRI quota for reserved seats.
Each educational institution is free to devise its own fee structure, but there should be no profiteering or capitation fee charged in any form.
Committees have been formed pursuant to the Islamic Academy case to act as a regulatory measure aimed to protect the interest of students as well as minorities themselves, but it is subject to judicial review for any arbitrary interference in administration or financial matters in professional institutions.
Constitution of India, Articles 141 & 142 - A later smaller Bench cannot pronounce its own independent opinion on any issue settled by a larger Constitution Bench even if it is inclined otherwise.
It can only trace and cull out the ratio decidendi of the larger Bench judgment or examine the explanation or clarification given to the same.
Constitution of India, Articles 29(2), 30(1) & 19(1)(g) - The right to establish educational institutions for charity or profit is protected by Article 19(1)(g); that includes the right of minorities under Articles 29 and 30 as well as the general right of the majority.
However, because of the protection of Article 30, the minority institutions do not become immune from the operation of regulation means.
The state is still competent to impose reasonable restrictions, limited only to the extent not amounting to encroachment on their rights under Articles 29, 30 and 19(1)(g).
Article 30(1) is a protective measure only, not an abstract right.
Regulations must be reasonable and rational, directed towards maintaining excellence of education and efficiency of administration within minority educational institutions.
Constitution of India, Articles 29(2), 30(1) & 19(1)(g) - The territorial unit for consideration would be the state where the institution is set up, not the nation as a whole.
Minority, whether linguistic or religious, is determinable only by reference to the demography of a state and not the population of the community of the country as a whole.
Constitution of India, Articles 29(2), 30(1) & 19(1)(g) - A minority institution established in one state must admit a bulk of the students of the minority community of that very state.
Borrowing some non-minority students from other states would not deprive it of its essential character.
Constitution of India, Articles 29(2), 30(1) and 19(1)(g) - Once an institution is granted aid or recognition, certain restrictions or conditions may be imposed, but the regulations and recognition cannot be aimed at depriving the institution of its minority status.
"Education" - Properly planned education input can contribute to the growth of society as well as for the individual.
Merit and excellence are necessary in professional as well as non-professional education.
Constitution of India, Articles 29(2), 30(1) & 19(1)(g) - Aided and Un-aided institutions - Admissions to professional education courses must be on merit selection by all, minority or non-minority institutions.
Transparency and merit have to be unavoidably taken care of and cannot be compromised.
Constitution of India, Articles 29(2), 30(1) & 19(1)(g) - Only the first part of para 68 in the judgment in Pai Foundation case is the law laid down by the majority.
Constitution of India, Articles 41, 42, 215 and 226 - Mere isolated observations or reasoning in a judgment to reach a conclusion cannot be taken as law laid down by the Bench.