Articles 234 and 309 of the Constitution of India, along with Section 8 of the Presidency Small Causes Courts Act, 1882 and Rule 4(3)(a)(i) of the Bombay Judicial Service Recruitment Rules, 1956, dictate the service conditions and placements of judicial officers, specifically Small Causes Court Judges and Distt.
& Sessions Judges.
These officers are given equal status and inter se placement by the High Courts of Maharashtra and Gujarat, as there is no question of subordination under Chief Judges.
The Judges of Small Causes Courts in mega cities may perform arduous functions, but this does not justify changing their cadre so as to place them in the cadre of District Judges/Addl.
Distt.
Judges.
Therefore, their placements in different categories by the High Courts are proper and cannot be faulted.
[Para 21] B.
As an employer, it is always open to adopt a policy for fixing service conditions of employees, so long as they are in consonance with the Constitution and are not arbitrary or unreasonable.
When several cadres are sought to be unified in few cadres, it is natural that all Judicial Officers have to be placed in one or other cadres.
The administrative control of the subordinate judiciary lies with the High Courts and the decision of the Full Court on the recommendations of the Committee for unification and categorization is not to be interfered once it is based on all relevant considerations.
The Maharashtra and Gujarat High Courts' decision to place Small Causes Courts Judges and Chief Metropolitan Magistrates in Category-2 between Civil Judges of subordinate judiciary and Distt.
& Sessions Judges of High Judiciary is upheld.
The place of Judges in Categories 1, 2 or 3 does not affect the service conditions, pay scales, or seniority of the Judges, including Asstt.
Judges or Chief Judges of subordinate judiciary.
They cannot claim to be placed in the cadre of the Distt.
& Sessions Judges only because of their powers and duties.
A hierarchy in the administration must always be maintained.
[Paras 28, 31, 32, 37, 39, 40, 49, 50, 51 and 53]