Court will generally refrain from interfering with disciplinary enquiries at an interlocutory stage, unless there is manifest illegality or a lack of procedural and natural justice principles.
If a punishment order is stayed, it is equivalent to setting it aside.
However, if a decision is inherently bad, it may be subject to interference.
Any court at the interim stage or at the stage when an appeal is preferred on such an order, it will not make any observations that would prejudice issues or prejudice the party.
Civil Procedure Code, 1908, Order 43 Rule 1(r).
[Paras 1 and 2]

Before taking disciplinary action that will seriously affect someone's financial future or reputation, a full, fair, and proper enquiry must be conducted.
If this procedure is bypassed or short-circuited, a Court will interfere at the initial stages.
Where an order is adverse, the party who appeals comes with a handicap since there are already defined findings.
However, the court will interfere only in a small category of cases where the procedure or orders passed are so wrong, so illegal, or so inherently perverse.
Civil Procedure Code, 1908, Order 39, Rules 1 and 2.
[Paras 9 and 10]

An authority may refuse legal assistance where regulations do not permit a lawyer.
Where regulations specifically permit the services of a lawyer, an aggrieved party can insist upon such assistance.
However, where the regulations are silent, it would be difficult to hold that the denial of legal assistance would vitiate the enquiry.
Enquiries should be conducted in keeping with the skills of those holding the enquiry and participating in it, and a lawyer should not have an undue advantage.
Domestic participants in the enquiry can obtain guidance and advice from legally qualified people, but this cannot justify that a lawyer's participation must be permitted during domestic enquiries in every case.
[Para 7]

The High Court must demonstrate that the state of law is such that the Supreme Court needs to settle the law or lay down the law.
The Supreme Court is a Court of Constitutional Appeal, and granting a certificate in a situation where there is no resolution of the law required or particularly in interim orders or applications is not permissible.
Constitution of India, Article 134.
[Para 13]