Candidates have the right to be considered for appointment to service, but if not selected, they cannot challenge the decision.
Selection is exclusive to the selection body, and the High Court cannot appeal the Public Service Commission's decision.
Two court cases are referenced.
[Paras 15 and 21] B.
If candidates appearing for an interview know that the chairman of the Commission who had recommended the names of candidates for his department is a member of the selection committee, they cannot object to the selection after not being chosen.
A court case is referenced.
[Paras 15 and 20] C. The Chairman of the Commission is the competent authority for forwarding the names of eligible candidates to list 'C.'
Eligible candidates of that department cannot be denied their right to be considered for selection merely because the Chairman of the Commission is participating in the selection proceedings.
Discrimination would occur if they were denied selection.
[Para 16] D The Chairman of the Public Service Commission is competent to forward the names of eligible candidates to Register 'C,' and for this reason, he cannot be disentitled from participating and presiding at the Public Service Commission during the interview.
No bias can be attributed to him solely for this reason.
A court case is referenced.
[Paras 16 and 17] E. The principle of bias only applies when the authority is exercising judicial or quasi-judicial functions.
If the authority is exercising executive functions, the principle does not apply.
Reliable evidence must be adduced to show that the public official was actuated by bias in fact.
Two court cases are referenced.
[Paras 18 and 19] F. The Rules do not prescribe a procedure for marking in the selection process.
The Commission can adopt any procedure to assess the suitability of candidates and regulate selection.
The case 1985(3) SLR 200 is not applicable.
[Para 20] G Recommended candidates from other departments have no right to challenge the recommendations as the recommendation and forwarding of names to be enrolled in register 'C' is purely an executive function between the department and the government.
[Para 21]