Calcutta Municipal Corporation Regulations, Regulation 55-A, and Constitution of India, Article 311 - If a full-fledged enquiry was held associating the delinquent and no prejudice is shown to have been caused to him by not allowing him to inspect documents collected and relied upon as part of the preliminary enquiry, then there was no violation of the rules of natural justice.
[Paras 9 and 10] B.
Constitution of India, Article 226 - High Court is not permitted to re-appreciate evidence in writ jurisdiction to disturb Enquiry Officer findings based on evidence on record.
[Para 11] C. Constitution of India, Article 311 - Evidence Act - Evidence Act provisions are not relevant in departmental proceedings.
[Para 15] D. Constitution of India, Articles 14, 226, 311 - Property purchased by the delinquent's wife might be purchased from her Stridhana or from his money, with the decision being based on the delinquent's unique knowledge.
This kind of question can be raised for the first time in writ jurisdiction before the High Court, even if it was explicitly waived before the Enquiry Officer.
[Paras 14, 17, and 18] E. Interpretation of Statutes - Negative words in Statute - When negative words are used in a statute, the provision is considered mandatory - The text and context should be considered when interpreting the provisions of a statute.
[Paras 21 and 23] F. Calcutta Municipal Corporation Act, 1980, Section 21(4), and Constitution of India, Article 320(3)(c) - When passing an order of dismissal against an employee, it is mandatory for the Corporation to consult the Municipal Service Commission, as stipulated in Section 21(4) - use of negative words in a statute are mandatory.
[Paras 23 and 24] G. Constitution of India, Article 226 - Court has the power to mould relief in an appropriate manner, even if an order of dismissal is found to be illegal for want of consultation with the Municipal Service Commission - delinquent can be awarded back wages only if the Commission disapproves the dismissal order instead of reinstatement.
[Paras 25 and 26]