The Labour Court under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (Sections 18(3) and 10) has the power to summon any party to appear before it and implead it as a party to the reference so as to bound it by the award passed in the reference.
The mere orders passed by the Government under Sections 4(6) and 5 of the Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings Act with respect to the management of a factory coming to vest in the transferee company will not take away the power of the Tribunal under Section 18(3) of the ID Act.
A previous management, who claims the liability in regard to the workmen was of the previous management, was a necessary party to the dispute.
[Para 5]

Under Section 25-FF of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, compensation to the workmen is the obligation of the transferor, not of the transferee management of the undertaking.
[Para 6]

Industrial Tribunals have to confine themselves to the terms of reference.
In this case, the Tribunal adjudicated the entitlement of workmen under Section 25-FF, which was not a part of reference.
The dispute relates to 1974 and the writ has been decided in 1995.
The workmen were entitled to recover the amount of compensation by invoking other provisions of law.
The High Court refused to interfere with the award in the exercise of its powers under Article 226 of the Constitution.
[Para 6]

The Commissioner under the Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings Act has no jurisdiction to adjudicate the matters relating to the termination of services of the workmen.
The Acquisition Act does not provide any remedy to the workmen for the claims under Section 25-FF of the ID Act, which can only be agitated before the Tribunal.
[Para 8]

Under the Payment of Bonus Act, Section 8, a contention that workmen worked only for 22 days in the year and rest of the period was on layoff was held to be illegal and unjustified.
The workmen were held to be entitled to full salary for the period, and it cannot be said that they worked for less than 30 days in the year.
They are entitled to Bonus for the period.
[Para 9]

If the establishment had stopped working and to rehabilitate it, the factory was taken over and transferred to another company, thus the services of the workmen came to an end, it cannot be said that Section 25-FF was not attracted.
[Para 10]

Under the Industrial Disputes Act, Section 25-FF, and the Industrial (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, Section 18-AA, it is for the transferee management to decide as to which and how many workmen are to be taken in employment from the transferor undertaking.
It may depend on the terms of transfer.
If the object of the transfer was to bring a closed factory in working condition and workmen were given fresh appointment, and action of the management was held justified by the Tribunal, the High Court may refuse to interfere so as to give continuity of service from the date of joining of the workmen in the closed establishment/transferor.
[Para 12]