Constitution of India, Article 226 - A writ petition cannot be dismissed merely on the ground that an alternative remedy is available, if that remedy has become barred by limitation.
[Para 5]

Madhya Pradesh Lok Parishad (Bedakhali) Adhiniyam 1974 - An allotment of an accommodation that is part of the pool meant for government servants allotted to a private trust is void ab-initio, if there is no contract as contemplated by Article 299 of the Constitution of India and it is unclear why the allotment was made to the Trust.
Eviction of the Trust is also held to be lawful.
[Paras 8 to 25]

Constitution of India, Articles 14 and 299 - An order of allotment of an accommodation meant for government employees in favor of a private trust that is not entitled to pool accommodation and where no written contract is in existence is not valid.
Any action taken by the State government in the matter of granting privileges must conform to the principles of fair play and the person concerned is not entitled to any extra benefit.
[Para 13]

Constitution of India, Article 166 - An order passed by a Deputy Secretary purporting to make an allotment and subsequently cancelled by a Joint Secretary who has the same authority does not violate any rules of business.
[Para 15]

Natural justice - Failure of person to appear before authorities even though duly served does not violate the rules of natural justice.
[Para 16]

Natural justice - The Government is not required to provide an opportunity of hearing before passing an order making or cancelling an allotment of accommodation meant for government servants.
[Para 16]

Constitution of India, Article 14 - In the matter of granting benefits, the Government must act in a reasonable manner.
[Paras 18 to 21]

Constitution of India, Article 14 - Allotment of pool accommodation meant only for government servants is not permissible to a private institution, and all allotments made in contravention of statutory provisions must be reviewed.
[Para 23]