Petitioner, initially appointed as a clerk in the office of District Red Cross Society, was promoted but later transferred from one District Red Cross Society to another without their consent.
An employee has a lien on the post they are confirmed on, even after they are allocated to a different district or state.
Without a specific order, such a lien cannot be terminated or suspended.
As such, the petitioner's lien with the District Red Cross Society, Hissar, against a permanent post as an Accountant would be maintained, and their seniority would be kept in the parent district to be considered for the next higher promotion in their parent district.
[Paras 11, 12 and 13]

The President of District Red Cross Society, Sirsa, lacked the authority to suspend, charge sheet, and terminate the services of the petitioner since they had a lien on a permanent post as an Assistant in District Red Cross Society, Hissar.
The impugned order of termination was passed without obtaining prior concurrence from the State Branch, making it without jurisdiction, and set aside.
[Paras 18 and 19]

The Enquiry Officer had acted as both prosecutor and judge during the enquiry, and since no presiding officer was appointed, the principles of natural justice were violated.
[Para 22]

The Enquiry Officer submitted the enquiry report more than five months after written arguments were submitted, and the order of termination was passed ten months after the reply to the show cause notice was submitted.
No explanation was given for the inordinate delay, which rendered the disciplinary proceedings, including the impugned order, vitiated.
[Paras 25 and 26]

The District Red Cross Society is amenable to writ jurisdiction under Article 226.
A writ petition challenging the infraction of service rules and the rules of natural justice can be maintained against it.
[Paras 29 and 30]

The inquiry proceedings, report of the inquiry officer, and impugned order of dismissal stood vitiated due to the infraction of rules adopted vide regulation No. 5 dated 16121988 by respondents.
[Para 32]