Constitution of India, Article 227 - Education - Degrees and Diplomas - Equivalence of degrees and diplomas - The determination of the equivalence of the degrees and diplomas/certificates issued by different educational institutions/universities is not within the purview of the writ court as it is a matter for specialists to assess.
[Paras 9 and 16]  B.
All India Council for Technical Education Act, 1987, Section 10 - University Grants Commission Act, 1956, Section 10 - The All India Council for Technical Education only has advisory and recommendatory functions and is not an authority empowered to issue any sanctions by itself.
It can only submit reports to the UGC for appropriate action, and any action taken by the UGC must be done in consultation with the council.
[Paras 11 and 16]  C. Constitution of India, Articles 14 and 311 - Thapar Institute of Engineering and Technology Staff Regulations, Regulations 14(xxvi) and 38(ii) - Contract of service - Termination during probation in terms of contract of service without any stigma - Natural justice - Principles of natural justice are not mandatory in cases where the termination of services of an employee during probation for not holding the necessary qualifications is made in compliance with the terms of the contract of service and without casting any aspersion or stigma on the employee's career.
Employees of a university are not protected by Article 311 of the Constitution in such cases as the foundation of the order is not punitive action.
The termination of services by an innocuous order during probation for not holding necessary qualifications cannot be considered illegal.
[Paras 14 and 16]  D. Thapar Institute of Engineering and Technology Staff Regulations, Regulations 14(xxvi) and 38(ii) - Delegation of powers of the Board of Governors - Discharge during probation - The Chairman and/or the Registrar of the University, to whom the powers of the Board have been delegated in certain matters, have jurisdiction and any action taken by them on behalf of the Board is not without authority.
[Paras 17, 18, 19 and 21]