Punjab Government National Emergency (Concessions) Rules, 1965, Rules 4 and 2 - Military Service - Under the definition of 'Military Service' in Punjab Rules, as amended by the State of Haryana, persons who served during Emergency are entitled to the benefits of the period they served during Emergency in the armed forces even if they joined prior to the Emergency period.
Rule 2 of Punjab Rules is split into two parts: (a) the point of time of enrolment of the person in Armed Forces; and (b) the service rendered by such person.
As there's no expression 'service rendered by a person who had been enrolled or commissioned during the period of operation of Emergency' in Punjab Rules, persons who joined the Army service during Emergency are not entitled to the benefit of entire service while those who opted for Army as a career may be entitled to the benefit of the Emergency period alone.
But the classification made by Haryana amendment between those who joined military service during Emergency and those who joined prior to that is valid.
The petitioners are only entitled to the grant of benefits of service rendered during Emergency after joining civil services in Punjab such as increments, seniority, and all other consequential benefits.
The Narinder Nath Sharma v. State of Punjab does not establish the correct law in so far as it provides that all were entitled to the benefit of the entire period of military service.
[Paras 8, 9, 14 and 17]

Constitution of India, Article 226 - Punjab Government National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965, Rules 2 and 4 - Interpretation of Rules and Statutes - The Court should read the Rules in their plain language and give their intended meaning as postulated by the Legislature.
To change or add words to the rules and give a different meaning would be against the well-accepted principles of interpretation of the statute.
The doctrine of the "golden rule of construction" is applicable to the interpretation of Rules.
The concept of innovative law is one of the acknowledged canons of such interpretation of rules primarily because the law is mutable.
The 1965 Punjab Rules do not exclude those who joined Armed Forces before the promulgation of Emergency from the persons entitled to benefit from military service for the period they served during Emergency.
[Paras 15 and 16]