Central Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1967, Rule 15(5) - Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1975, Rule 8.8.
- Legal assistance - If an untrained person faces a prosecutor who is trained but not a legal practitioner, they are entitled to engage one for their defence.
[Para 8]  B Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1975, Rule 8.8.
- Legal Assistance - Rejecting the engagement of a lawyer is illegal if an untrained person faces a legally trained presenting officer and feels handicapped in their defence.
The government is obliged to provide legal assistance in such cases.
[Para 7]  C Constitution of India, Article 226 - Enquiry proceedings - Natural justice - A petitioner's request to be represented through an Advocate should only be denied with cogent reasons.
If the petitioner is prevented from effectively defending themselves, the enquiry proceedings become invalid.
[Para 11]  D. Show cause notice - Enquiry report - The government cannot issue a show cause notice without applying its mind to the inquiry officer's findings or disagree with them, without recording the same.
Issuing a show cause notice without considering the inquiry officer's findings is illegal.
[Para16]  E. Constitution of India, Article 226 - Censure - Natural justice - A speaking order is required for every quasi-judicial order.
The government is duty-bound to consider the petitioner's objections and decide whether they merit acceptance or rejection based on objective application of mind and reasons.
The government's failure to provide reasons for rejecting the reply filed by the petitioner renders the impugned order non-speaking and violates the principles of natural justice.
[Para 17]  F. Constitution of India, Article 226 - Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1975, Rules 8(3), 8(4) - Charge sheet - Censure - The punishing authority must frame specific articles of charges and include all relevant evidence supporting those charges.
The enquiry can only be held on the basis of charges framed against the delinquent, and the punishing authority cannot punish them for a charge that was not part of the original memo or statement of allegations.
If the government punishes a petitioner on a charge that wasn't included in the original memo, the penalty of censure is illegal and void.
[Paras 19, 21 and 23]