Railway Protection Force Service is not considered a civil service of the state or union, despite being categorized as railway servants as per Section 10 of the Railway Protection Force Act, 1957.
They are considered to be creatures of the 1957 Act and 1987 Rules when it comes to matters of conditions of service and imposition of punishment by holding disciplinary enquiries and for other purposes they are railway servants.
[Para 18]
Restrictions or abrogations of fundamental rights conferred by Part III of the Constitution can be imposed by Parliament in order to ensure the proper discharge of duties and maintenance of discipline in the Armed Forces, within reasonable limits.
If any such restrictions are inconsistent with other fundamental rights, they are subject to Article 33, and such inconsistency or repugnancy is saved by Article 33.
As long as the restriction is reasonable to carry out the purpose of special provisions of an Act of Parliament, it cannot be described as discriminatory or violative of Articles 14 and 16 or principles of natural justice.
[Paras 25, 26, 28 & 32]
Fundamental rights can be restricted, but such restriction must be intelligent and carefully deliberated.
Such a restriction is amenable to scrutiny by the courts.
[Para 30]
In disciplinary proceedings, a delinquent is given the right to cross-examine the witness but not his friend assisting him.
He can also cross-examine witnesses who are superior to him in rank, but through the Enquiry Officer, not by directly putting questions to such witnesses.
The right to cross-examine is not taken away.
In view of the fully comprehensive provisions to provide a full opportunity to the delinquent, these reactions under the Rules are not violative of Article 14 or 16 or principles of natural justice.
[Paras 33 to 37]
The restriction on assistants only being friends enrolled members or officers below the rank of the Enquiry Officer is reasonable so as not to influence the Enquiry Officer.
[Para 39]
Provisions of Railway Protection Force Rules, 1987, Rule 1541 are saved by Article 33 of the Constitution Therefore, the Rule is not violative of Articles 14, 16, and 21 of the Constitution for non-supply of a copy of the enquiry report before imposing the punishment when the provision of appeal has been provided.
[Para 40]