Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Act, 1964, Section 9(2)- General Clauses Act, 1899 - Payment of Bonus Act, 1965 - To be considered a local authority, an Authority must possess the characteristics of a Municipality, a District or Body of Port Commissioners, and must be entitled to or entrusted with the management of a Municipal or a local fund.
[Paras 12 and 14]
Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Act, 1964, Section 16 - Local Fund refers to the fund that the local authority is authorised to manage under the enactment under which the Authority is created, which can only be used for specific purposes.
Even if it is utilisable only for certain purposes, it still remains a local fund and the statutory control of discretion does not change the character of the fund.
[Para 26]
Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board Act, 1964, Section 16 - General Clause Act, 1899 - Payment of Bonus Act, 1965, Section 32 (iv) - A local authority, such as the Board, is a body corporate, operates in a defined area, has nominated representative members, and has a certain degree of autonomy with the power to levy rates, charges and fees and to manage the fund.
Thus, the Board is a local authority within the meaning of the General Clauses Act as well as the definition of S 32 (iv) of the Bonus Act.
[Para 27]
Constitution of India, Article 14 - Two conditions must be satisfied to pass the test of permissible classification.
Firstly, the classification must be founded on an intelligible differentia which distinguishes persons or things that are grouped together from others left out of the group.
Secondly, the differentia must have a rational nexus to the object sought to be achieved by the Statute in question.
[Para 38]
Constitution of India, Article 14 - Payment of Bonus Act, 1965, Section 32 (iv) - The rule of equality can only arise if it is demonstrated that the petitioners are situated similarly to others entitled to bonus in identical circumstances.
The employees of the Board and those working in other establishments paying Bonus cannot be treated as belonging to one class nor is the impugned provision of S.32 (iv) discriminatory if it treats them as two different groups identifiable differently.
[Paras 51 and 54]
Constitution of India, Article 14 - Payment of Bonus Act, 1965, Section 32 (iv) - The nature of duties an employee performs, including whether they are in public interest or for monetary gain, is a distinctive feature upon which a classification can be made between two groups performing similar activities.
[Para 59]
Constitution of India, Article 14 - Payment of Bonus Act, 1965, Section 32 (iv) - The classification of employees of a local authority engaged in an industrial activity carried out in public interest without the predominant purpose of making monetary gain would be permissible.
The differentia between such employees and those entitled to bonus is intelligible and reasonable, and the classification has a nexus to the object intended by the Act, namely not to impose additional liability on establishments run in public interest.
Thus, the Constitutional validity of the provision of S.32 (iv) would not fail.
[Para 59]