Constitution of India, Article 311 - Punjab State Leather Development Corporation Limited Service Rules, 1982, Rule 3.2.1 - Companies Act, Section 289 - The Managing Director passed the termination order of the petitioner, which was later ratified by the Board of Directors with the approval of the Chairman, having retrospective effect from the date the order was passed - Section 289 and Article 99 only require that papers must be placed before the members of the Board of Directors, and they must be aware of the action taken and apply their minds - Termination of services of the petitioner was not in violation of Section 289 of the Companies Act.
[Paras 10 and 11] B. Punjab State Leather Development Corporation Limited Service Rules 1982, Rules 4.1 - Seniority/Common seniority list - Seniority must be determined on the basis of pay scales of the posts held by persons in one cadre/group and not among persons holding different posts and having different qualifications - "Last come first go" or "First come last go" principles may apply - The employer cannot prepare a common seniority list when all posts have different qualifications.
[Paras 12 and 13] C. Constitution of India, Article 226 - Writ jurisdiction/Mala fide/Administrative action - The court cannot interfere with the creation or abolition of a post unless there is patent arbitrariness, malice, or violation of statutory provisions - The employer has the prerogative to create or abolish a post as per requirement of manpower - Mala fide must be substantiated - The court cannot draw dubious inference in the absence of sufficient material before it.
[Para 14] D. Constitution of India, Article 226 - Mala fide/Party/Natural justice - Allegations of mala fide cannot be upheld against a person who is not a party before the court in person - There needs to be sufficient material to substantiate the allegations.
[Para 15] E. Constitution of India, Articles 226 and 311 - Abolition of posts - The Corporation is justified in taking a decision for abolishing the post due to surplus staff and there is no malice or arbitrariness if some posts are abolished.
[Para 15] F. Constitution of India, Article 14 - Evidence Act, Sections 114, 115 - Estoppel/Waiver/Acquiescence - Acceptance of dues on illegal termination does not operate as estoppel, waiver or acquiescence against an employee from challenging termination order.
[Para 17] G. Constitution of India, Articles 14 and 16 - Abolition of post - Absorption in other departments - There is discrimination if the petitioner is terminated while other employees, including his juniors, are absorbed in other Government Departments - The Corporation's action not to recommend the petitioner's case for absorption is illegal, arbitrary and mala fide - The petitioner's case should be recommended to the Government for absorption in any Government Department.
[Paras 18 and 19]