The petitioner is seeking to have an order quashed by which a punishment of reprimand was administered to him, but Rule 25(1) provides that promotees must receive one increment of higher responsibility if an officer is charged with an offense under the Act.
[Paras 3 and 4]

The petitioner's choice is not to prevail as to whether he should be dealt with under Section 83 or under the provisions pertaining to Court Martial that appear in Chapter X of the Act.
[Para 6]

Punishment of reprimand for failure to appear at the time fixed at the parade or place appointed for exercise or duty is covered under Sections 39(d) and 63 of the Army Act, 1950.
Although a person on conviction is liable to suffer imprisonment which may extend to three years or such less punishment mentioned in the Act, if the offense is covered by Section 39(d), then Section 63 of the Act would not be applicable.
[Para 8]

The petitioner's plea that the statutory complaint was not disposed of within 90 days and therefore, the order imposing punishment on him stands vitiated is not tenable.
The regulation makes it clear that in case of delay, a report explaining the reasons for the delay would be forwarded to the next higher authority.
The regulation does not lay down that if the delay remains unexplained, the statutory complaint would be deemed to have been accepted.
By the mere fact that the complaint was disposed of a little bit belatedly does not mean that any prejudice was caused to him.
The petitioner's complaint was rejected by the proper authorities, and the punishment of the petitioner cannot be said to have been washed out by some delay occurring in the complaint.
Moreover, no plea was taken in the writ petition on this point, and the respondents did not have the opportunity to meet this point by giving out facts explaining the delay that occurred in disposing of the statutory complaint.
The petitioner cannot be permitted to raise this plea.
[Para 14]

The jurisdiction of the Supreme Court or the High Court under Articles 32 and 226 of the Constitution, respectively, can be invoked to interfere in extraordinary proceedings arising only if there is an error of jurisdiction or violation of law patent on record or the orders made on the basis of mala fide or bias.
There are no defects in the proceedings that were taken against the petitioner or the orders passed against him.
Consequently, the petition is dismissed.
[Para 16]