Article 254 of the Constitution of India lays out the rules regarding the affiliation of educational institutions with universities.
The National Institute of Teachers Education Act and the Indraprastha Vishwavidyala Act both have provisions related to this issue.
In this case, a recognized educational institute under the National Institute of Teachers Education Act applied for affiliation with Guru Gobind Singh Indraprastha University.
The university granted provisional affiliation but refused to continue after a year.
The court held that while recognition is a precondition for starting or continuing courses under the National Institute of Teachers Education Act, universities may have their own rules for granting affiliation.
However, both Acts must be interpreted in a harmonious manner because students receive degrees from the university.
State Acts may also come into play.
The interpretation of Section 16 of the University Act must consider the survival of both institutions.
The mere fact that an Act is a Central Statute does not mean that it has to destroy the fabric and edifice of the university.
[Paras 10 to 13]

The principles of repugnancy are not attracted to recognition of educational institutions versus affiliation.
These are two separate functions of different institutions, having their own provisions of Rules and Acts, and can be exercised at their discretion.
Even a recognized institution may be refused affiliation by a university.
[Paras 13 and 14]

A University is an instrumentality of state under Article 12 of the Constitution and is amenable to the jurisdiction of High Court under Article 226 for judicial review of its actions.
The High Court can examine its actions whether the same are based on mala fides or arbitrariness, or relevant factors were omitted from consideration.
The actions of the University must be fair and in consonance with the principles of natural justice.
[Para 15]

Section 14(6) of the National Institute of Teachers Education Act uses the word 'shall', which raises a presumption that the particular provision is mandatory.
However, this presumption may be rebutted by other factors such as the object and scope of the enactment and the consequences flowing from such construction.
It was held that Section 14(6) of the Act should be construed as merely directory and not mandatory.
[Para 15]