Constitution of India, Articles 14 and 16 - Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education & Research, Chandigarh Act, 1966 - Fairness in administrative actions - Selection and Appointment of Professors in PGI, Chandigarh - The administration of PGI has been committing numerous errors in the appointments of its professors.
It has been directed to ensure fairness, transparency, and judicious application of mind in making appointments.
[Paras 8, 10 and 15]

Constitution of India, Articles 14 and 16 - Selection - Appointments - Relief - Unfairness and irregularities in the matter of Selection and Appointment of Professors in PGI, Chandigarh - In the case where ineligible persons have been considered as eligible and appointments have been manipulated, the entire selection is vitiated.
Relief cannot be granted to the petitioner except that the entire selection would be quashed.
[Paras 9, 14 and 17]

Constitution of India, Articles 14 and 16 - Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education & Research, Chandigarh Act, 1966 - Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education & Research, Chandigarh Rules, 1967 - Selection and Appointment of Professors in PGI, Chandigarh - The appointing authority has no jurisdiction to down- grade the post advertised for selection after completion of the selection process, which violates fundamental right of equality.
Such selection cannot be sustained, and appointment by down-grading of post after selection to make ineligible persons eligible is not allowed.
[Paras 11 to 14]

Constitution of India, Articles 14 and 16 - Selection - Eligibility - The post and eligibility conditions, once advertised, cannot be changed after the selection process is undertaken.
Posts have to be advertised afresh for effecting any change.
[Para 14]

Administrative action - Practice and procedure - Any practice not good, appropriate, and acceptable in law and not in consonance with statutory provisions, should be abandoned and not allowed to continue.
[Para 15]

Constitution of India, Articles 14 and 16 - Selection - Appointments - Relief - Unfairness and irregularities in the matter of Selection and Appointments - Mere selection and recommendations do not vest the candidate with any right, much less an indefeasible legal right to be considered for appointment to the advertised posts.
[Para 17]

Constitution of India, Articles 14 and 16 - Selection - Appointments - Unfairness and irregularities in the matter of Selection and Appointments - A greater responsibility is cast upon the employer to adhere to the principle of merit and fairness once a post is treated as a selection post.
[Para 17]

Constitution of India, Articles 226, 14 and 16 - Selection - Appointments - Necessary parties - Members of Selection Committee are not necessary or proper parties.
[Para 20]

Constitution of India, Articles 14 and 16 - Selection - Appointments - Recording of minutes of Selection Committee - If the experts Committee is an integral part of the Selection Committee which interviews the candidates in their presence, there is no reason why separate minutes of the Selection Committee should be recorded, and it will be proper to record cumulative minutes of the Selection Committee.
[Para 21]