The Constitution of India, Articles 14 and 226 - Education - Admission - Reservation for students of rural area - The government reserved 15% of seats in Engineering and Medical Colleges for students of rural areas.
However, the government subsequently made a policy decision to exclude schools that collected tuition fees and only include government and aided higher secondary schools under rural reservation.
The basic formulation of reservation is to make rural students equal with urban students.
The principle being that if some members of the same class, namely rural students, are too advanced from that of rural students, they would be misfits in that class.
After excluding them alone, there would be a compact class of rural students.
Students of fee-levying schools and students of schools not levying fees form a different class.
Therefore, the object of providing concession to students studying in schools lacking in facilities cannot be achieved if the concession is extended to fee-levying schools.
The classification made is based on a rational basis having relation to the object to be achieved.
The impugned government orders are valid and enforceable.
[Paras 15, 17 and 21] B.
The Constitution of India, Article 14 - Education - Admission - Reservation for students of rural area - The concession was extended only to schools not levying tuition fees and not to schools levying tuition fees.
To claim protection of Article 14, it must be shown that persons differently treated are similarly situated and discrimination is made with uneven hand.
The contention that in some villages, there are no government-aided schools, and therefore, fee-levying schools should be treated as rural area schools cannot be accepted.
[Para 19] C. Doctrine of Legitimate Expectation and Promissory Estoppel - Reservation for rural students - The concession was extended only to government and aided schools in rural areas and not to schools levying fees.
The government is not estopped from identifying real rural students on the basis of policy decision, which is supported by material.
The decision of the government is a bona fide one and satisfies the requirement of non-arbitrariness.
[Para 20]