Contract Labour Regulation and Abolition Act, 1970 - Interstate Migrant Workmen (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 1979 - Public Interest Litigation - The President of the Contract Labour Union files a writ petition alleging that 200 workers are being forced to work 12 hours a day under deplorable conditions, are unpaid minimum wages, and are treated as bonded labourers.
The plea seeks the release of the workers from the contractors' grasp.
The case also highlights the administration's casual attitude towards labourers.
The third respondent failed to determine the real state of affairs, which was discovered by the Advocate Commissioner.
On the other hand, the fourth respondent reported that no labour or migrant labour law violations had occurred.
Article 23 of the Constitution was not given any value by these officials.
[Paras 2 and 20] B. Labour legislations - Implementation - Directives were issued to all district heads to ensure the scrupulous implementation of labour laws.
The Commissioner of Labour will take the following measures to accomplish this: (1) Competent authorities should make adequate and frequent site visits.
(2) The District Administration, in collaboration with the Labour Department, should monitor the work performance of various establishments that have obtained registration/permission/license under various labour legislation.
(3) Officials of the Labour Department should conduct at least a fortnightly thorough examination of the mentioned facilities.
(4) The Commissioner of Labour and the District Administration, through mutual understanding, will oversee these inspections.
(5) Site inspections, project areas, etc., as directed by Senior Officials of the Labour Department should be carried out randomly by the authorities.
(6) It is insufficient to conduct periodic checks of muster rolls by these officials.
(7) Whenever possible, they must engage with workers to determine if they have any complaints.
(8) The authorities must ensure that all workers are paid the minimum wage, and if not, take measures to ensure that they are.
(9) The District Administration should also guarantee that Medical Officers of the State or those of the E.S.I.
Corporation conduct routine examinations of the workers at the job site.
[Para 21]