Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India - When an ad hoc or temporary appointment is made after giving consideration to all eligible candidates, limiting the appointment to a specific date with automatic termination of service, even when there is no regular candidate available, is arbitrary and contrary to Articles 14 and 16.
Such actions will be treated as unjust, irrational, oppressive, and unconscionable.
[Para 19]

Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India - While there can be a valid reason to terminate the services of someone who has been employed for a particular work and the work is no longer available, the employer cannot limit the appointment to a specific date.
Even if the employer describes the employment as ad hoc, the employer cannot incorporate a clause in the appointment letter that the service of the employee will be terminated on a particular date despite the post being available and the need for manpower related to that post.
Such a clause would be unreasonable, contrary to public interest, and cannot be justified.
[Para 19]

Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India - According to Section 115 of the Evidence Act, a person is estopped from questioning the terms and conditions incorporated into the appointment letter.
In this case, even if the petitioner protested against the arbitrary and oppressive conditions of appointment, she would have done so at her own peril.
The petitioner cannot challenge the right of the respondent to give her a limited appointment despite the post being available and no suitable candidates are available.
Failure to object to the conditions incorporated into the appointment order cannot be used to deny relief.
The condition in the appointment order that limits the appointment of the petitioner until the relevant date with a condition that her service shall end on that day and she would be relieved is arbitrary, oppressive, unconscionable and unconditional.
[Para 24 and 29]

Articles 14, 16 and 226/227 of the Constitution of India - The termination of the petitioner's service has been declared illegal and quashed.
The petitioner shall be taken back in service with all consequential benefits.
However, she has no right to continue in service after the availability of regularly selected candidates.
The employer can terminate her services due to unsatisfactory work even though no regularly selected candidate may be available.
The government of Haryana should take immediate steps to send requisitions to the HPSC and SSS Board regarding vacant positions, which will help in making regular selections.
[Para 29]