The petitioner challenged an advertisement issued by the University inviting applications for appointment to the posts of Professors, Readers and Lecturers.
The advertisement did not mention the minimum qualifications required for the positions, however, each candidate who purchased a prescribed application form was given a hand-out containing the minimum qualifications laid down by the UGC.
It was held that the advertisement was not rendered defective simply because the minimum qualifications were not stated in the advertisement, and it was not demonstrated that any prejudice was caused to any of the applicants or the University by this omission.
Accordingly, the advertisement was not illegal.
[Para 7]

The advertisement for the appointment to the posts of Professors, Readers, and Lecturers in various subjects did not mention the percentage of reservation or the number of reserved posts in the category of Lecturers.
However, the fact that there was a reservation quota laid down by the UGC was well known, and the reservation policy was to be observed not at the point of making applications, but at the point of making selections.
The advertisement was held proper and not illegal because merely mentioning the existence of "usual reservation" was enough to attract SC/ST candidates in making applications.
[Para 9]

The advertisement for the posts of Professors Readers and Lecturers in different subjects was sent to all universities and the UGC, and wide publicity was given in daily newspapers.
It was not necessary for it to be published through an all-India publicity campaign.
The advertisement was held proper and not illegal.
[Paras 10 and 13]

In selecting candidates for appointment to the posts of Professors, Readers and Lecturers in different subjects, a selection committee was required to be constituted under law, which had to include one expert to be nominated by the Academic Council.
Members of the Academic Council had deliberated over the subject and had left the final choice to the Vice-Chancellor.
The choice of experts expressed by the Academic Council through the Vice-Chancellor was deemed to be a nomination by the Academic Council, and the Selection Committee was held validly constituted.
[Paras 19 to 23]

Two individuals had served in the same University seven or eight years before, although they were not associated with each other at the time of selection.
The expert member had ceased to be a person connected with the University at the time of selection, and his participation did not vitiate the proceedings of the selection committee where he sat as an expert.
[Paras 21, 25 and 26]

A resignation letter from an expert member of a Selection Committee who was responsible for selecting candidates for appointment to the posts of Professors, Readers, and Lecturers in different subjects was sent directly to the Vice-Chancellor of the University, rather than to the Registrar, as required by law.
The endorsement of "resignation accepted" by the Vice-Chancellor was deemed meaningless and had no legal effect.
This action was in violation of a provision of the Act, and the selection was held to be vitiated.
Section 58 could not be used to justify such behavior.
[Paras 32, 34 and 35]

The UGC has provided for the process of selection to be completed within a period of four months from the date of advertisement inviting applications for teaching posts.
This limitation is recommendatory or directory and not mandatory in character.
Any delay that has occurred would not vitiate the selection, which is otherwise valid and in order.
[Para 3]

A petitioner, who was a member of the Court of the University constituted under Section 20 of the Act, challenged the actions and proceedings of the University, which he believed were inconsistent with the law governing it.
It was held that the petitioner had the requisite interest entitling him to file a writ petition, as a member of the Court.
Even though he was not aspiring for selection, he had locus standi to file a writ petition.
[Para 39]

Since there was no alternative efficacious remedy for challenging appointment under Section 55 of the Act, a writ petition was maintainable for the appointment to the posts of Professors, Readers, and Lecturers in different subjects.
[Para 40]