Article 16 of the Constitution of India states that direct appointment refers to appointments made by open competition while excluding promotees and "transferees".
A promotee who is promoted to an officiating vacancy or an ex-cadre post does not become a member of the service unless they are substantively appointed to a cadre post.
However, a direct recruit appointed to an ex-cadre post alone is considered a member of the service even while on probation.
Rule 2(12)(a) applies to them, but not to a promotee from a Class II service.
[Para 2]

Rule 5(3) of the Punjab Service of Engineers Class I PWD Public Health Branch Rules, 1961, states that the rota principle cannot be used in the matter of recruitment in the service.
If there is no increase in cadre strength in a particular year, and there are vacancies due to retirement, death, or removal, dismissal, they shall be filled by promotees, not shared by direct recruits by rotation.
Rule 3(3) provides for promoting quotas for direct recruits, with the first five vacancies to be given to them, and the sixth to be given to the next promotee.
[Para 2]

The Punjab Service of Engineers Class I PWD Public Health Branch Rules, 1961, does not provide a rota for filling posts or determining the seniority of service members.
Promotees are expected to man all temporary and permanent posts of the direct recruitment quota until such time when direct recruitment is made.
Promotees can hold posts beyond their 50% quota, and this period of service is not considered when determining seniority under Rule 12.
Ten posts allocated to Haryana are treated as cadre posts within the cadre strength declared under Rule 5(2).
[Para 13]

If promotees exceed 50%, and there are no more positions for direct recruitment, then direct recruits get priority in seniority.
The rota principle does not apply in the matter of recruitment.
If there is no increase in cadre strength, promotees fill the vacancies created by retirement, death, or removal or dismissal, not shared by direct recruits by rotation.
[Para 20]

The state government cannot redetermine the cadre strength retrospectively, and it could only happen prospectively.
[Para 4]

Promotees' claim for seniority is premature until posts within their declared quota have become available.
Petitioners with direct appointments receive priority in seniority over promotees in such a scenario.
[Para 19]

The seniority of the petitioner, a direct recruit, should be adjusted, considering his year of allotment as 1977 along with the seniority of ten persons allocated to Haryana.
The state needs to refix the seniority of petitioners and other promotees to the extent of their fixed quota, including the ten persons allocated to Haryana in 1966, in the cadre.
The orders declaring cadre strength retrospectively for certain years, seniority, and promotions have been quashed, and the state is directed to fix petitioner's seniority below the tenth person allocated to the state.
[Paras 21-24]