Article 311 of the Constitution of India outlines rules related to Minerals and Metals Trading Corporation of India Limited Employees Conduct, Discipline and Appeal Rules, 1975.
Rule 30 (ii) (iii) and Rule 7 dictate that an enquiry must be conducted before a promotion can occur and that the procedure of the enquiry should be followed as much as possible.
Exceptions to these requirements are made for cases where it is not reasonably practicable to hold an enquiry.
In cases where the enquiry is dispensed with only because it would not have been completed before the delinquent employee's retirement, Rule 30 (ii) applies.
[Para 18] B Rule 30 (ii) categorizes cases in which it is not reasonably practicable to hold an enquiry because of the security of the state.
In cases where the procedure of enquiry was not followed and an enquiry is dispensed with, the order passed under Rule 30 (ii) must show the reasons for the authority's satisfaction that it was not reasonably practicable to hold an enquiry.
An order passed under Rule 30 (ii) cannot be justified on any other ground except those mentioned in the order.
When the order is passed under Rule 30 (iii), it dispenses with the enquiry for security of the state reasons that may not be reflected in the order itself.
Dismissing an employee based on an allegation of misconduct and passing an order under Rule 30(ii) immediately before they retire is arbitrary and potentially dishonest.
[Paras 19-20] C. An action of a public servant cannot be made dependent upon the result of litigation unless it is independently concluded that the employee was actuated with corrupt or ulterior motives.
[Para 21] D. Rules that make provisions for dispensing with holding an enquiry in exceptional cases, similar to what is made under article 311(2) of the Constitution of India, is not ultra vires the Constitution.
[Paras 23-24] E. Compliance with principles of natural justice is required before imposing punishment, and it is essential that the employee is given a chance to respond before a decision regarding punishment is reached.
Any rule that permits punishment without notice to the employee is flawed.
[Para 24]