Constitution of India, Article 311, Punjab Tehsildari Rules, 1952, Rules 25(2)(c)(i) and 25(2)(c)(a) - Petitioner represented against the adverse remarks - Order of compulsory retirement passed on the same adverse remarks during the pendency of representation - Order of compulsory retirement illegal.
[Para 7] B. Punjab Tehsildari Rules, 1952, Rules 25(2)(c)(i) and 25(2)(i)(a) - Financial Commissioner recording confidential report and also disposed of appeal against the same - Financial Commissioner not competent to decide the appeal against the confidential reports recorded by him - Representation should have been placed before the higher authority i.e. Revenue Minister, for disposal.
[Para 7] C. Constitution of India, Article 311(2) Punjab Tehsildari Rules, 1952, Rules 25(2)(c)(i) and 25(2)(i)(a) - Confidential report/Compulsory retirement/Doubtful integrity - Order of compulsory retirement passed on the basis of confidential reports recorded with the remarks integrity doubtful amounts to punishment from removal of service - Such report will be of no value - Remarks expunged.
[Para ] D. Confidential reports/Adverse remarks/Doubtful integrity/Natural justice - Confidential reports containing remarks of doubtful integrity must be followed by reasons - Reasons for recording remarks of doubtful integrity should be disclosed to the employee - Depriving the employee of making representation against such remarks - Such report will be of no value - Remarks expunged.
[Para 14] E. Constitution of India, Article 311 - Compulsory retirement/Confidential reports/Solitary adverse report - Solitary/Remote adverse report against the integrity of an employee - Such report cannot be made the basis of compulsory retirement.
[Paras 15 and 16] F. Constitution of India, Article 311 (2) - Representation against the adverse remarks affecting the integrity of an employee - Representation against such remarks should be decided with a speaking order - Representation decided with non-speaking order "considered and rejected" - Order rejecting any representation not proper - Such reports cannot be made the basis of compulsory retirement.
[Para 17] G. Constitution of India, Article 311 - Compulsory Retirement/Age of superannuation - Power of compulsory retirement at such stage should be exercised with full care and only in such cases where the employee is found to be dead wood.
[Para 18]