Mr. Uma Dutta, Advocate in Cr.
W 422/81, Mr. Rameshwar Sharma Advocate in civil Writ No. 2583/81, Mr. RS Murgal, Advocate in CW Civil 537/82 - Army Act, Sections 160 and 154 - Confirming Authority has a right to direct General Court Martial to revise its findings and sentence - General Court Martial has to reconsider its earlier finding not obliged to change its earlier view.
According to Section 160 of the Army Act, the Confirming Authority has the power to order a General Court Martial to reconsider its findings or sentence.
After reconsideration, the General Court Martial is not obligated to change its earlier view.
During reconsideration, the General Court Martial must apply its mind independently, uninfluenced by any observations previously made by the Confirming Authority.
Army Act, Sections 109 and 154 - Same Officer appointed both as convening Authority as well as confirming authority - There is no violation of rule.
Neither the Act nor the Rules prohibit the same officer from being appointed both as the convening authority as well as the confirming authority.
The commanding officer has been given the power to convene the General Court Martial and act as the confirming authority.
Sections 109 and 154 of the Army Act expressly postulate the Central Government itself being the convening and confirming authority.
Therefore, delegating both powers to one officer complicates no rules.
Army Rules, Rules 22 (1) and 28 (2) - No written charge is required to be given to accused when hearing is at the stage under 22(1).
At the stage under rule 22(1), the accused is only required to be informed about the charge or the accusation against him, and opportunity has to be given to him to cross-examine any witness or to call any witnesses and make statements in his defence.
Therefore, the word "charge" occurring in rule 22 does not mean charge as contained in the charge-sheet.
Army Act, Section 160 and 154 - Sentence awarded by Court Martial - Court cannot go into question whether evidence was sufficient or not - Courts have only to see whether some evidence to implicate the accused existed on record.
The Court cannot question whether evidence was sufficient or not, they are required to determine that there was some evidence to implicate the accused on record.
Army Rules, 177, 179 and 182 - The Court of Inquiries are Primarily fact-finding bodies that are required to collect evidence to make a report thereon.
Courts of Inquiries are primarily fact-finding bodies and are mandated to collect evidence and make a report based on it.
Army Act, Sections 160 and 154 - General Court Martial passing sentence on accused - Confirming Authority directing Court Martial to reconsider its finding - On reconsideration, Court Martial passing much harsher sentence on same facts - High Court has no discretion to interfere with sentence in writ jurisdiction.
After reconsideration, the General Court Martial may pass a harsher sentence.
If the members of the General Court Martial are not accused of malfeasance, then the High Court has no authority to interfere with a sentence passed by a duly constituted General Court Martial.