Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, Section 25-O(1) - Closure of undertaking - Permission application - Mandatory requirement of serving copy on representative of workmen - Failure to comply renders filing of application invalid and state government cannot consider it on merits.
[Para 7] B.
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, Section 25-O(3) - Closure of undertaking - Permission application - Benefit of deemed permission - Application returned as mandatory requirement of serving copy on representative of workmen not stated - Date of receipt after representation considered as filing date for determining period prescribed for benefit of deemed permission.
[Paras 7, 8] C. Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, Section 25-O(2) - Closure of undertaking - Permission application - Enquiry notice - Running of time - Period of sixty days under subsection (3) of section 25-O arrested once an enquiry notice is issued on receipt of application by state government.
[Para 10] D. Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, Section 25-O - Closure of undertaking - Permission application - Life of order refusing/granting permission - Life of an order either granting or refusing permission fixed for one year - Life of deemed permission understood to also be one year.
[Para 11] E. Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, Section 25-O(6) - Closure of undertaking - Permission application - Order refusing/granting permission - Examination of correctness - Single Judge should have considered correctness of order on merits as it could absolve appellant firm from consequences set out in subsection (6) of Section 25-O of the act.
[Para 11] F. Constitution of India, Articles 226, 227 - Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, Section 25-O - Closure of undertaking - Permission application - Rejection - State government found that circumstances preceding application did not reflect bona fide intention - Strike and Union formation occurred before filing - No error apparent on face of record, so State government's conclusion cannot be interfered with.
[Paras 11, 12]