The orders passed by executive authorities on domestic enquiries are of a quasi-judicial nature, since the competent authority, after evaluating and assessing the evidence presented against the delinquent official, must decide whether the charges against the official are proved or not.
The executive authorities must have a judicious approach regarding the service of any government employee.
However, the courts may review the judgements if the delinquent official is provided with opportunities to defend himself during the departmental inquiry against him.
If the verdict is based on no evidence, the court may intervene in the interest of justice to see if the action against such an employee is justified under the law.
[Para 4]

Section 16.28 of the Punjab Police Rules provides the power to review proceedings vested in the IG Police, DIG Police, and SP Police.
Rule 16.28 is of mandatory nature.
[Para 6]

As mentioned in paragraph 4, orders passed by executive authorities on domestic enquiries are of a quasi-judicial nature.
If no evidence is presented to support the verdict, the court may review the judgement in the interest of justice to determine if the action against the employee is justified under the law.
After reviewing the case, the High Court found that there was no evidence to hold the charge was established.
Thus, the order of dismissal was set aside.
[Paras 4 and 8]

As stated in paragraph 4, orders passed by executive authorities on domestic enquiries are of a quasi-judicial nature, and the competent authority must evaluate and assess all the evidence presented against the delinquent official.
Executive authorities must have a judicious approach in regards to the service of all government employees.
If the court finds that the findings of the enquiry officer are based on no evidence, it may examine the plea in the interest of justice and determine if the action against the employee is valid under the law.
[Para 4]

The order of dismissal passed by the SP Police was based on the enquiry report, and no show cause notice or opportunity of hearing was given to the Head Constable.
Hence the dismissal was arbitrary and against natural justice.
The Order of dismissal was invalid as it lacked jurisdiction and was set aside.
The judgement is supported by the case referred to as 1998(6) SC 464.
[Paras 6 and 7]

The D.S.P.
passed an order of dismissal during a departmental inquiry against a Head Constable who had been investigated by the SP Police.
Since the SP Police was lower in rank to the appointing authority, the initiation of proceedings was void ab initio.
The order of dismissal was against jurisdiction and set aside.
[ Para 7]