Panjab University Calendar, Chapter VI Regulation 4 - Panjab University Syndicate decision dated 16121973 - Applications for the post of professor - Selection - Exceptional cases only for condonation of delay as per decision dated 16121973 - Vice Chancellor's decision not to condone the delay exhausts the power - Decision of Vice Chancellor requires justification, without which it cannot be sustained.
[Paras 30 to 34] B.
Constitution of India, Articles 14 and 16 - Recruitment - Cut off date - Stipulation of the last date for submission of applications determines eligibility and ensures equality of opportunity - Relaxing the rule cannot be done without notifying the public - Entertaining applications after the cut off date is erroneous.
[Paras 35 & 36] C. Constitution of India, Articles 16 & 14 - Recruitment - Delayed applications from candidates living abroad - Grounds for condoning the delay must be established.
[Para 38] D Panjab University Calendar, Chapter VI, Regulation 4 - Selection - Power of Vice Chancellor to place names of suitable persons before the Selection Committee without applications from the candidates - Invocation of the provision is intended for persons of eminence - Regulation 4 cannot be invoked if the candidates' applications were rejected on the ground of late submission.
[Paras 40 to 42] E. Constitution of India, Article 16 - Bias - Bias is a state of mind and is inferred from the circumstances of a given case - Mere denial of allegations of bias is not conclusive.
[Para 52] F. Constitution of India, Articles 16 and 226 - Estoppel - Selection - Participation in interviews results in estoppel - It must be proven that the candidate had knowledge of the facts before appearing before the Selection Committee.
[Paras 53 & 54] G. Constitution of India, Articles 16 and 226 - Necessary parties - Challenge to selection and appointment - Not necessary to implead all members of the Selection Committee.
[Paras 55 & 56] H. Selection - Approval of appointments - Syndicate's ratification cannot rectify the basic illegality of an illegal selection.
[Para 57] I.
Constitution of India, Article 226 - Judicial review - Academic matters - Courts do not normally interfere in academic selections made by selection committees - Only in cases where non-intervention may result in failure of justice, the court may interfere.
[Para 58] J Appointment - Public interest - Teacher appointments serve the benefit of students - Leaving a post for years together without serving any public interest is an attempt to retain the status label.
[Para 59]