According to Article 226 of the Constitution of India, Rule 10 of the West Bengal Services (Classification, Control, and Appeal) Rules, 1971, and Rule 10(1) of the West Bengal Services (Death-cum-Retirement) Benefit Rules 1971, disciplinary proceedings cannot be continued against an employee after their retirement unless there is a definite charge stating that the employee caused loss to the government during their employment through grave misconduct or negligence.
If such a charge exists and is ultimately proven, then the government can recover the quantified loss from the employee's pension.
In this case, the petitioner had retired from his government service and no proceedings could have been continued against him by the disciplinary authority as the employer-employee relationship had come to an end.
The proceeding that was initiated against him before his retirement under Rule 10 of the (Death-cum-Retirement) Benefit Rules, 1971 was not applicable, and therefore, the proceeding which had been continued after his retirement under Rule 10 of the West Bengal Service (CCA) Rules, 1971 cannot be sustained.
The allegations against the petitioner were not of his misconduct causing loss or damage to the government; instead, the misconduct was that he had allegedly acquired assets disproportionate to his known sources of income.
As such, the order withholding 25% of pension was quashed.
B Unless there is a definite charge against a retired government servant stating that they caused loss to the government in the course of their employment by committing grave misconduct or negligence, no proceedings can be sustained against them, whether initiated before their retirement or after.
If such a specific charge exists and is ultimately proven to have caused loss to the government, the loss can be recovered from the retired servant's pension.
In this case, there was a charge that the petitioner had acquired assets disproportionate to his known sources of income, but it was not the case that he had acquired these assets by defrauding or causing loss to the government.
As such, the respondents were directed to release the full pension of the petitioner with arrears and all other retirement benefits.