Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, Section 2(j) - Industry - Employers must object if they believe that their industry is not covered by the definition of industry.
They must do so at the earliest stage of Sections 10 and 33, and not after the completion of proceedings by the Labour Tribunal.
Workers are only able to rebut the objection at the proper stage.
[Para 12]

Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, Section 2(j) - Industry - Charitable Hospital - Private hospitals run as commercial ventures that aren't offering free treatment to poor patients are covered by the definition of industry.
[Para 12]

Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, Section 10(1) - Reference - Issues - If the management does not challenge the reference at the reference stage on the grounds of defect in issues referred, and the labour court can grant the reliefs under the existing issues, the same cannot be challenged at a later stage.
[Para 13]

Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, Sections 10 and 11-B - Back wages - Reference - If an issue finds that a worker's termination is illegal, and the worker is entitled to reinstatement, the Labour Court can grant consequential relief of back wages under the same issue.
The Court cannot be deprived of the right to grant such relief under the same issue merely because it was not specifically mentioned in the reference.
[Para 13]

Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, Sections 10 and 33 - Misconduct - Termination without holding enquiry - The management needs to seek permission to lead evidence that justifies their actions before the Labour Court to justify their termination of an employee without holding an enquiry.
If no permission is sought, any evidence led without permission has to be ignored, being totally unauthorized.
No amount of evidence led without permission can justify the action illegally taken.
The court cannot direct the employer to justify its action, which would result in the ignoring of the unauthorised evidence.
[Paras 14 to 18]

Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, Sections 2(oo) & (bb) - Termination without holding an enquiry on the basis of misconduct of a criminal nature - Workers acquitted by a criminal court cannot have their findings disbelieved, especially when no enquiry was held by the management.
[Para 19]