Punjab State Leather Development Corporation Ltd Service Rules, 1997, Rules 9 and 3.2.1 - Termination - Competent authority - The Managing Director, who has been delegated the powers of appointments by the Board of Directors to the posts with maximum pay scale up to Rs. 1300/-, passed an order terminating the services of the petitioner, who held the post in the time scale of Rs. 510-1080.
This order cannot be challenged on the grounds of jurisdiction.
[Paras 10 and 11]
Punjab State Leather Development Corporation Ltd Service Rules, 1997, Rule 3111 - Probationer - Confirmation of probationer - Automatic confirmation - The appointing authority may confirm the employee if his work during the probationary period is found to be satisfactory.
The use of word `may' in the Rule makes it clear that satisfactory completion of probation does not lead to automatic or deemed confirmation.
[Para 12]
Punjab State Leather Development Corporation Ltd Service Rules, 1997, Rules 3111, 31 and 81 - Termination during probation - Non-completion of probation period satisfactorily - Misconduct - Termination with non-stigmatic order - If an innocuous order of termination of services of a probationer is challenged on the grounds of being punitive in nature, then the Court must investigate the preceding and attending circumstances to find out the true and real character of the order.
If the order was based on allegations such as negligence, inefficiency, absence from duty, pilferage, dishonesty, misappropriation, defalcation or embezzlement etc. and has been passed without following the procedure and principles of natural justice, it should be considered vitiated due to the violation of principles of natural justice.
[Paras 13 to 20]
Termination - Illegal termination - Relief - Molding of relief in the facts and circumstances of the case - Termination found vitiated for violation of principles of natural justice after 25 years of service as a probationer by the new Corporation absorbing the staff of another Corporation.
As the Corporation was virtually defunct with most employees leaving due to the Golden Hand-Shake policy, the employee is entitled to all consequential benefits, including 50% back wages and benefits of Golden Hand-shake police instead of reinstatement.
[Para 21]