The Constitution of India, through Articles 16 and 226/227, govern the Advertisement, Qualification, and Appointment for Posts of Clerks/Clerk-cum-Typists.
The advertisement for Clerk/Clerk-cum-typist positions does not suggest that educational qualifications, namely Matriculation with Ist Division, mentioned under the head 'qualifications' for the post of Clerk/Clerk-cum-typist are liable to be relaxed or condoned in certain cases.
The Vice-Chancellor holds no power to relax the qualifications, as there is no rule or resolution of the Syndicate empowering him to relax any qualifications.
Therefore, the VC cannot provide any relaxation of qualifications.
It is held that candidates who have been recommended for the interview who did not possess the necessary qualifications as per the advertisement have to be excluded for appointment consideration.
[Paras 8 to 11]
The Constitution of India also regulates Interviews, Selection Committees, and the Posts of Clerks/Clerk-cum-typists.
Candidates who obtain 50% marks or more in the written test enable themselves to be called for the interview.
Those who obtained 495% or below 50% marks in the written test are not eligible to be interviewed.
If any such candidate is recommended by the Selection Committee for an appointment during the interview, they have to be excluded.
[Para 13]
The Constitution of India again applies to Interviews, Reserved/Unreserved Quotas, and the Selection List for the Posts of Clerks/Clerk-cum-typists.
Scheduled Caste/Backward Class candidates who fulfill the unreserved quota qualifications are entitled to compete with the general category candidates against unreserved posts.
They cannot be denied their right to compete for the general category quota on the grounds that some positions have been reserved for Scheduled Castes/Backward Classes.
Thus, candidates belonging to these classes are entitled to be called for an interview against the general category quota.
Failure to call for the interview of such candidates belonging to Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes/Backward classes who secured more than 50% marks in the written test alongside general category candidates does not nullify the entire selection process at the interview.
The proper course for the University is to interview all candidates who obtained 50% marks and belong to SCs/STs/BCs afresh, prepare a list of those candidates who have been interviewed earlier, and make appointments on the basis of merit.
[Para 15]