Constitution of India, Article 311 - Indian Electricity Act, 1910, Section 44 - Disciplinary proceedings - Removal from service - The court quashed proceedings against the petitioner on technical grounds, and advice was obtained from the legal department.
The legal department opined that departmental proceedings against the petitioner could be initiated de novo, and a fresh charge sheet could be issued with certain modifications.
A draft charge sheet was prepared for consideration and approval of the disciplinary authority.
The MC of Delhi, exercising powers of the Delhi Electric Supply Committee, being the competent authority, was requested to consider the case and pass appropriate orders before the matter could be placed before the Central Vigilance Commission for its advice/concurrence.
Seeking advice from the Commission before proceeding in the matter cannot render an order illegal or without jurisdiction.
[Paras 12 and 14] B.
Constitution of India, Article 311 - Indian Electricity Act, 1910, Section 44 - Disciplinary proceedings - Removal from service - Comments from the Legal Department regarding the application under Section 44 of the Act were called for before submitting the case to the disciplinary authority.
The Legal Department opined that Section 44 is applicable for interference with meters or licensee's works.
The illegal shifting of a service line with a meter board, which are licensee's works, definitely comes under Section 44.
Whosoever interferes with the same is liable to be punished under Section 44 of the Act.
[Para 12] C. Constitution of India, Articles 226 and 311 - Indian Electricity Act, 1910, Section 44 - Jurisdiction of Central Vigilance Commission to give any opinion or finding a requested by disciplinary authority - The court held that if the disciplinary authority has arrived at its own decision on the material available, then the decision cannot be said to be tainted with any illegality merely because disciplinary authority consulted Vigilance Commissioner and obtained his views on the very same material.
The disciplinary authority is well within its rights to consult the Central Vigilance Commission.
Mere consultation with CVC cannot prejudice petitioner in any manner.
The petition was dismissed.
[Para 11]