The Haryana Service of Engineers Class I P.W.D.
(Punjab Health) Rules, 1961, Rules 6 and 9, and the Punjab Service of Engineers Class I PWD (Buildings & Roads Branch) Rules, 1960, Rules 6A and 6B involve the amendment and retrospective effect of amendment/vested rights/qualifications according to the Constitution of India Articles 14, 16, and 309.
Under the unamended rules of Diploma Holders, Engineers were eligible for promotion from Class II to Class I Service of Engineers.
However, the amendment, which made a degree in engineering an essential qualification from the retrospective date, deprived the petitioners of their vested right of promotion based on their seniority.
Retrospective amendments of the rules cannot extinguish vested rights, and the amendment was considered arbitrary, unreasonable, capricious, discriminatory, and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
[Paras 3, 7, and 9]

According to Section 82 of the Reorganisation Act, the military service/deemed date of appointment of the petitioners entitled them to not have their service conditions change to their detriment without prior approval of the Central Government.
Therefore, since the amendment took away the petitioners' vested rights, prior approval of the Central Govt. was necessary.
The amendment of rules with retrospective effect was considered invalid for violating Section 82 of the Reorganisation Act.
[Paras 8, 9, and 10]

The Punjab Govt. National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1956, and the Punjab Service of Engineers Class II P.W.D.
(Public Health Branch) Rules, 1966, specify qualifications of degree and diploma/ex-servicemen.
Ex-commissioned officers and servicemen holding a diploma in Civil Engineering and having five years of continuous distinguished service were deemed to be equivalent to the degree qualifications prescribed under the recruitment rules.
As per the advertisement and the Punjab Govt. National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965, the petitioner was deemed to possess qualifications equivalent to the degree qualifications since he was an ex-serviceman.
However, the amendment of rules did not interfere with the rights of emergency released officers' promotion to the position of S.E./C.E.
[Paras 10, 12, and 13]